Title: Information-Aided DVL Calibration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.31216v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Jul 2026 00:39:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Information-Aided DVL Calibration 

Zeev Yampolsky ∗, , and Itzik Klein, The Hatter Department of Marine Technologies Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel 

Abstract —The Doppler velocity log (DVL) velocity measurements are critical to the accuracy of autonomous underwater vehi-cle (AUV) navigation solutions and, consequently, to mission success. To ensure accurate measurements, the DVL is com-monly calibrated before mission start while the AUV sails on the water surface, receiving global navigation satellite system (GNSS) signals that provide accurate reference measurements. Conventionally, Kalman filter-based approaches are employed during calibration to estimate the scale factor and misalignment errors. However, in certain environments, GNSS signals may be unavailable, rendering conventional calibration impossible and forcing the use of uncalibrated DVL measurements, which degrades navigation performance. To address this limitation, this work proposes information-aided calibration (IAC) with two main contributions: first, improving the accuracy of conventional Kalman filter-based calibration in GNSS-enabled environments, and second, enabling GNSS-free DVL self-calibration. Using real-world AUV datasets, the proposed IAC models achieve up to a 20% average improvement in GNSS-enabled environments and up to a 35% improvement in velocity vector estimation during GNSS-free DVL self-calibration. Overall, the proposed approach improves navigation accuracy, reduces navigation drift, and consequently enhances mission reliability. 

Index Terms —Doppler velocity log (DVL), DVL Calibration, Autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV), Information-Aided Nav-igation, Kalman filter, GNSS-denied calibration. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) are widely utilized in marine and oceanic exploration, research, and industrial applications. Their applications range from marine biological surveys and Arctic ice-cap exploration to marine geoscience and autonomous infrastructure inspection [1–5]. Due to the autonomous nature of AUV operations, accurate navigation solutions are critical for mission success and the vehicle’s safe return [6–8]. Commonly, underwater navigation relies on the fusion of a strapdown inertial navigation system (SINS) and a Doppler velocity log (DVL) [9–12], where the DVL provides accurate velocity measurements processed in a nonlinear esti-mation framework, such as the extended Kalman filter (EKF) [13, 14] or unscented Kalman filter (UKF) [15–17], to correct and bound inertial drift. The DVL provides velocity measurements by transmitting acoustic beams toward the seabed and estimating each beam’s velocity using the Doppler shift effect upon receiving the reflected signals, thereby providing direct velocity measure-ments of the AUV [18, 19]. Nevertheless, DVL measurements still contain error sources such as misalignment between the DVL and AUV body frames, scale factor errors, and biases. Therefore, to ensure accurate velocity measurements, the DVL 

> ∗Corresponding author: Zeev Yampolsky, zyampols@campus.haifa.ac.il

must be calibrated prior to mission start to estimate the deterministic, time-invariant error terms [20–22]. Traditionally, calibration is performed while the AUV sails on the water surface to receive global navigation satellite system (GNSS) signals, which serve as reference measurements for DVL calibration [23–27]. During the calibration process, the AUV is required to perform predefined maneuvers to increase the observability of the estimated states, commonly the scale factor and misalignment errors, within the employed Kalman filter framework [23, 26, 28]. Nevertheless, recent works have proposed alternative ap-proaches for DVL calibration, including optimization-based methods [29], genetic algorithms [30], and data-driven frame-works [31], demonstrating promising results. Furthermore, re-searchers have shown that calibration can be performed using straight-line or nearly constant-velocity trajectories [27, 31]. However, two main challenges in DVL calibration remain unresolved: first, how can DVL calibration be performed in GNSS-denied environments? Second, can the accuracy of traditional Kalman filter-based DVL calibration be further improved using information-aiding approaches? In this work, we address the aforementioned challenges by proposing information-aided calibration (IAC) in the form of velocity information aiding with two main objectives: first, to improve DVL calibration when GNSS is available, and second, to enable GNSS-free DVL self-calibration. The proposed ap-proach is motivated by non-holonomic constraints, commonly utilized in land-based platforms such as vehicles [32]. Such non-holonomic constraints assume zero velocity along specific body-frame axes and are incorporated as measurement updates to improve navigation accuracy [33]. However, to the best of our knowledge, limited work has investigated the incorporation of such concepts into AUV navigation [34]. Therefore, this work makes the following main contributions: 1) Information-Aided Calibration : IAC framework for improved DVL calibration in both GNSS availability scenarios. 2) Zero Velocity information aiding : In GNSS-enabled scenarios, we propose to employ IAC by utilizing zero velocity information aiding during the DVL calibration for improved accuracy and reduced calibration time. 3) GNSS-free IAC DVL self-calibration : We offer a re-laxed error model combined with a novel GNSS-free IAC velocity assumption to enable GNSS-free DVL self-calibration in GNSS-denied environments, where the al-ternative is the use of uncalibrated velocity measure-ments. 

> arXiv:2606.31216v1 [cs.RO] 30 Jun 2026 2

We propose five modified IAC-based Kalman filter models. Two models are designed for GNSS-enabled environments and employ the same four-state formulation as their baseline counterparts. By incorporating the proposed IAC approach, these models achieve up to a 20% improvement compared to their baselines. Three additional models are designed for GNSS-denied environments and employ a relaxed three-state formulation combined with the proposed GNSS-free IAC approach, enabling DVL self-calibration with an average im-provement of 30% and up to 35% compared to the uncalibrated baseline. All proposed models were validated using real-world data collected by the University of Haifa AUV, demonstrating their robustness and applicability. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the DVL error model, and the Kalman filter frame-work. Section III details the proposed IAC approaches for both GNSS availability scenarios. Section IV presents the real-world validation process and the results of the proposed approaches. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. II. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

This section presents the mathematical formulation of the DVL velocity measurements and the Kalman filter framework for the DVL calibration problem. 

A. DVL Velocity Error Model 

Commonly, the following error model is applied during DVL calibration [23, 26]: 

˜vd = ( I + δk )Tdb (Tbn ˜vn + ωbnb × l) + σd (1) where ˜vd is the measured velocity expressed in the DVL frame, ˜vn is the measured velocity expressed in the navigation frame, Tbn is the transformation matrix from the navigation frame to the body frame, Tdb is the transformation matrix from the body frame to the DVL frame, δk is the scale factor, ωbnb 

is the platform’s angular velocity, l is the lever-arm between the platform’s center of mass and the DVL, and σd is the zero-mean Gaussian white noise. Commonly, the term ωbnb × l is neglected [21, 25, 29]. Therefore, the DVL calibration error model becomes [27]: 

˜vd = ( I + δk )Tdb ˜vb + σd (2) The transformation matrix from the body frame to the DVL frame, Tdb , is measured during DVL installation by formulat-ing the problem as Wahba’s problem [35] and solving it using model-based or data-driven approaches [36–38]. Nevertheless, small misalignment errors are still assumed to exist. Therefore, a more realistic transformation formulation that incorporates both the measured frame transformation and residual small misalignment errors is employed [39]: 

Tdb = ( I + ϕ×) ˆTdb (3) where ˆTdb is the estimated transformation, Tdb is the true transformation, and ϕ = ϕx ϕy ϕz

T represents the remaining small misalignment errors along the X, Y, and Z axes. Substituting (3) into (2) yields: 

˜vd = ( I + δk )( I + ( ϕ×))˜ vdGN SS + σd (4) where ˜vdGN SS is the measured GNSS velocity expressed in the DVL frame: 

˜vdGN SS = ˆTdb ˜vbGN SS (5) 

B. Kalman Filter Formulation 

A linear Kalman filter system model is defined as [40]: 

˙x = Fx + W (6) where x is the state vector, ˙x is its time derivative, F is the continuous-time system matrix, and W is the system noise matrix. The measurement is defined as: 

z = Hx + σv (7) where H is the measurement matrix, and σv is the measure-ment noise, modeled as a zero-mean Gaussian white noise distribution such that σv ∼ N (0 , v2).The discrete state vector time propagation is defined as follows [33]: 

ˆx− 

> k

= Φk−1 ˆx+ 

> k−1

(8) where ˆx− 

> k

is the apriori state estimate at the current time step 

k, ˆx+ 

> k−1

is the posterior state estimate at the previous time step 

k−1, and Φk−1 is the discrete-time system matrix at time step 

k − 1. The discrete-time error-state covariance propagation is given by: 

P− 

> k

= ΦkP+

> k−1

ΦTk + Qk (9) where P− 

> k

is the apriori state error covariance, P+ 

> k−1

is the posterior state error covariance, and Qk is the discrete process noise covariance. The discrete-time system matrix is obtained using a Taylor series expansion and neglecting high order terms [41]: 

Φk = I + Ft (10) where t is the system time interval. The process noise covari-ance is defined as Q = E[ ww T ]. Accordingly, the discrete process noise covariance is given by: 

Qk =

Z Ts

> 0

Φ(τ )QΦ (τ )T dt (11) Once a measurement becomes available, the Kalman gain is calculated as: 

Kk = P− 

> k

HTk (HkP− 

> k

HTk + Rk)−1 (12) where Rk is the discrete measurement noise covariance matrix at time step k, defined as Rk = E[ vv T ]. The posterior state error covariance is computed as: 

P+ 

> k

= ( I − KkHk)P− 

> k

(13) Finally, the updated state vector is: 

ˆx+ 

> k

= ˆ x− 

> k

+ Kk(zk − Hk ˆx− 

> k

) (14) where ˆx+ 

> k

is the state estimate at time step k after the measurement update and zk is the measurement at time step 

k.3

C. DVL Calibration 

The baseline state vectors for DVL calibration are defined as follows [27]: 

xM 1 = ϕx ϕy ϕz δk T (15) 

xM 2 = ϕx ϕy ϕz δk x

T (16) where xM 1 is baseline model 1 (M1) state vector including three misalignment angles and a scalar scale factor which applies over all three velocity components. xM 2 is the state vector of baseline model 2 (M2), consisting of the same three misalignment errors and a scale factor applied only to the X component. Since the estimated DVL error terms are constant and assumed time-invariant, the state derivatives of both baseline models are defined as zero: 

˙xM 1 = ˙ xM 2 = 0 (17) Subsequently, the system matrix is reduced to zero, F = 0 ∈

R4×4. Thus, the discrete system matrix in (10) is: 

Φk = I ∈ R4×4 (18) Note that Φk represents the system matrix for both baseline models, M1 and M2. By expanding the parentheses and neglecting second order error terms, the DVL error model in (4) is modified as follows: 

˜vd = ˜ vdGN SS + δk ˜vdGN SS + ( ϕ×)˜ vdGN SS (19) Subsequently, the following relationship between the DVL and GNSS measurements and the estimated error terms of M1 and M2 is obtained: 

˜vdGN SS − ˜vd = (˜ vdGN SS ×)ϕ − δk ˜vdGN SS (20) Thus, the measurement z for both M1 and M2 is: 

z = ˜ vdGN SS − ˜vd (21) where ˜vd is the measured velocity from the DVL. Since the state vectors of M1 and M2 are slightly different, their corresponding measurement matrices are also varied such that: 

HM 1 = ˜vdGN SS × −˜vdGN SS 

 ∈ R3×4 (22) 

HM 2 = ˜vdGN SS × −˜vdGN SS,x 

 ∈ R3×4 (23) where in (23) the term ˜vdGN SS,x is the X component of the GNSS velocity expressed in the DVL frame. III. P ROPOSED APPROACH 

In this section, we describe our five IAC models. Two IAC models (labeled M3 and M4) were designed to work alongside GNSS updates. In situations of GNSS-free conditions, that is in GNSS-denied environments or when operating without a GNSS receiver, we offer three IAC models (labeled M5, M6, and M7) for the calibration task. Figure 1 illustrates the proposed models, M3 to M7. 

Fig. 1: General diagram of our proposed IAC models (in green) in both GNSS availability scenarios. 

A. GNSS and Information-Aided Calibration 

Our proposed IAC approach is inspired by non-holonomic constraints commonly used in ground vehicles [32, 33], where no-slip and straight-line motion assumptions allow the body frame Y and Z velocity components to be approximated as zero, thereby improving accuracy and reducing drift. In this work, we adapt the non-holonomic constraints to DVL calibration and propose to apply zero velocity information aiding as an IAC in GNSS-enabled environment (IAC-G). Specifically, our proposed IAC assumes zero velocity only in the Z component of the GNSS velocity. The reason for that is twofold. First, some DVL manufacturers recommend installing the DVL with a yaw offset, causing the DVL X and Y axes to differ from those of the body frame, while the Z axis typically remains aligned. Second, the employed straight-line calibration trajectories result in nearly constant horizontal motion, Therefore, despite periodic vertical motion, the DVL Z axis velocity averages approximately to zero. Thus, our IAC-G velocity update is: 

˜vdGN SS IAC −G =



˜vdGN SS,x 

˜vdGN SS,y 

0

 (24) where ˜vdGN SS,x and ˜vdGN SS,y are the X and Y components, respectively, of the measured GNSS velocity expressed in the DVL frame. As such, we apply the proposed IAC-G non-holonomic constraints to both baseline models, M1 and M2, resulting in the following two novel models, each correspond-ing to one of the baseline models. 1) GNSS and IAC-G (M3) : This model is adapted from the baseline model M1 by applying the proposed IAC-G framework. Therefore, the same state vector is utilized: 

xM 3 = ϕx ϕy ϕz δk T (25) M3 utilizes the same error model as in (4). However, the GNSS-measured velocity is substituted with the proposed IAC-G velocity, ˜vdGN SS IAC −G , in (24). Thus, the following measurement is obtained: 

zM 3 = ˜ vGN SS IAC −G − ˜vd (26) 4

Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed IAC approaches in GNSS-enabled environments showing the difference between M3 and M4. The resulting measurement matrix is: 

HM 3 =

h

˜vdGN SS IAC −G × −˜vdGN SS IAC −G

i

= (27) 



0 0 ˜vdGN SS,y −˜vdGN SS,x 

0 0 −˜vdGN SS,x −˜vdGN SS,y 

−˜vdGN SS,y ˜vdGN SS,x 0 0



2) GNSS and IAC-G (M4) : This model applies the proposed IAC-G framework to the baseline model M2 and therefore utilizes the same state vector: 

x = ϕx ϕy ϕz δk x

T (28) By substituting the proposed IAC-G velocity, ˜vGN SS IAC −G ,from (24), into the error model in (4), the following measure-ment is obtained: 

zM 4 = ˜ vGN SS IAC −G − ˜vd (29) Subsequently, the measurement matrix is: 

HM 4 =

h

˜vdGN SS IAC −G × −˜vdGN SS,x 

i

= (30) 



0 0 ˜vdGN SS,y −˜vdGN SS,x 

0 0 −˜vdGN SS,x 0

−˜vdGN SS,y ˜vdGN SS,x 0 0



Figure 2 illustrates the information flow of the two proposed IAC-G approaches. 

B. GNSS-Free Information-Aided Calibration 

This section presents the proposed GNSS-free IAC (IAC-GF) framework for GNSS-denied environments, based on the following three assumptions for GNSS-free DVL self-calibration: 1) Simplified error model : A simple relaxed error model that employs only misalignment errors as follows: 

˜vd = ( I + ϕ) ˆTdb ˜vbIAC −GF (31) where ˜vbIAC −GF denotes the IAC-GF velocity vector. 2) Near-zero sway and heave velocity components : We propose approximating the Y (sway) and Z (heave) components of the missing GNSS velocity components expressed in the body frame as small, near-zero values, such that: 

˜vbIAC −GF,x >> ˜vb′ 

> IAC −GF,y

, ˜vb′ 

> IAC −GF,z

(32) where ˜vbIAC −GF,x , ˜vbIAC −GF,y , and ˜vbIAC −GF,z denote the unknown surge, sway, and heave components, re-spectively. Note that approximating or estimating the sway and heave components requires prior knowledge of the system dynamics, assumptions regarding the vehicle motion, or suitable heuristics for their estimation. 3) Surge velocity approximation : We propose deriving an approximation for the unknown surge velocity compo-nent, ˜vbIAC −GF,x , by leveraging the second assumption together with the following norm-based derivation. Since the norm operation is invariant to coordinate frame trans-formations, we have: 

|| ˜vd|| = || ˜vbIAC −GF || (33) By incorporating the second assumption in (32) and ex-plicitly applying the norm operation in (33), the following expression is obtained: 

|| ˜vd|| = || ˜vbIAC −GF || ≈ ˜vbIAC −GF,x (34) Thus, an approximation for the unknown surge compo-nent of the IAC-GF velocity expressed in the body frame is derived. Accordingly, the complete approximation of the IAC-GF velocity vector is given by: 

˜vbIAC −GF =



|| ˜vd|| 

˜vbIAC −GF,y 

˜vbIAC −GF,z 

 (35) Using these assumptions, we propose three GNSS-free DVL self-calibration approaches, as follows. 1) GNSS-Free IAC (M5) : This model utilizes the simplified error model presented in (31) with the proposed IAC-GF velocity in (35) to achieve: 

˜vd = ( I + ϕ×) ˆTdb ˜vbIAC −GF (36) Subsequently, the state vector is: 

xM 5 = ϕx ϕy ϕz

T (37) By further deriving (36), the following measurement is ob-tained: 

zM 5 = ˆTdb ˜vbIAC −GF − ˜vd (38) Subsequently, the measurement matrix is: 

HM 5 = ( ˆTdb ˜vbIAC −GF )× ∈ R3×3 (39) Note that both the measurement zM 5 and the measurement matrix HM 5 only utilize the DVL norm and prior knowledge of the sway and heave components (35). 2) GNSS-Free IAC (M6) : Here, we utilize the simplified error model in (31) and the approximated IAC-GF velocity from (35), but perform the calibration in the body frame instead of the DVL frame. Thus, the following is obtained: 

˜vbIAC −GF = ˆTbd(I − ϕ×)˜ vd (40) The state vector is defined as: 

xM 6 = ϕx ϕy ϕz

T (41) 5

Fig. 3: A block diagram illustrating the information flow for the proposed GNSS-free IAC models M5, M6, and M7. The measurement is derived as follows: 

zM 6 = ˜ vbIAC −GF − ˆTbd ˜vd (42) Subsequently, the measurement matrix is obtained: 

HM 6 =  ˆTbd(˜ vd×) (43) Note that, since the calibration is performed in the body frame, the measurement matrix is a function of the measured DVL velocity, unlike in M5, where it is a function of the approximated IAC-GF velocity. 3) GNSS-Free IAC (M7) : By employing the same error model as M6 in (40), the state vector is defined as: 

xM 7 = ϕx ϕy ϕz

T (44) To achieve the proposed IAC-GF DVL self-calibration without any prior knowledge of the sway and heave components required by M5 and M6, we modify the measurement in (42) and utilize only its first component, as follows: 

zM 7 = 1 0 0 (˜ vbIAC −GF − ˆTbd ˜vd)T (45) 

= || ˜vd|| − ( ˆTbd ˜vd)x

where ( ˆTbd ˜vd)x is the X axis component of the measured DVL velocity expressed in the body frame. Similarly, the measurement matrix is defined as: 

HM 7 = 1 0 0  ˆTbd(˜ vd×) ∈ R1×3 (46) Thus, M7 utilizes only DVL measurements, without requiring prior knowledge or approximations of the sway and heave components, thereby enabling a novel GNSS-free DVL self-calibration paradigm. Figure 3 illustrates the three proposed IAC approaches for GNSS-free DVL self-calibration. 

C. IAC Approaches Summary 

The proposed IAC-G and IAC-GF approaches result in five different linear Kalman filter models for GNSS-enabled and GNSS-free environments, respectively. In GNSS-enabled en-vironments, models M3 and M4 employ the proposed IAC-G framework together with a four-state vector consisting of misalignment errors and a scale factor. In GNSS-free environments, models M5, M6, and M7 employ a simplified error model together with the proposed IAC-GF framework, subsequently utilizing a three-state vector consisting only of misalignment errors. Models M5 and M6 require prior infor-mation to enable GNSS-free calibration, whereas M7 provides 

(a) T12 

(b) T14 

Fig. 4: DVL velocity vector expressed in the body frame, from Trajectory T12 (first dataset) and Trajectory T14 (second dataset). a fully standalone GNSS-free DVL self-calibration approach. Each of the five proposed models employs a different IAC assumption based on either the GNSS reference velocity, when available, or the approximated IAC-GF velocity as the reference. Accordingly, the models differ in their measurement vectors and measurement matrices. Table I summarizes the properties of the five proposed IAC models. IV. A NALYSIS AND RESULTS 

A. Dataset 

To validate the proposed IAC approaches, two real-world datasets collected in the Mediterranean Sea using the Univer-sity of Haifa AUV Snapir [42] were utilized. The first dataset contains thirteen trajectories, T1 to T13, each with a duration of 400 seconds and with different AUV dynamics [14]. The total duration of the first dataset is approximately 86 minutes. The second dataset includes two additional trajectories, T14 and T15, with durations of 500 and 600 seconds, respectively [43]. Thus, a total of fifteen recorded trajectories are used for the evaluation. To illustrate the recorded velocity dynamics, Figure 4 shows the recorded DVL velocity in both frames for trajectories T11 and T14. 6

TABLE I: Proposed IAC model properties including aiding type, modified GNSS velocity measurement, state vector, measurement, and measurement matrix.                                                                     

> Model IAC Type Baseline Model IAC Measurement State Vector Measurement Measurement Matrix M3 GNSS-enabled M1 ˜vdGN SS IAC −G
> ϕxϕyϕzδk T˜vdGN SS IAC −G-˜vdh˜vdGN SS IAC −G×−˜vdGN SS IAC −G
> i
> ∈R3×4
> M4 GNSS-enabled M2 ˜vdGN SS IAC −G
> ϕxϕyϕzδk x
> T˜vdGN SS IAC −G-˜vdh˜vdGN SS IAC −G×−˜vdGN SS IAC −G,x
> i
> ∈R3×4
> M5 GNSS-free Uncalibrated ˜vbIAC −GF
> ϕxϕyϕz
> TˆTdb˜vbIAC −GF -˜vdh
> ( ˆTdb˜vbIAC −GF )×
> i
> ∈R3×3
> M6 GNSS-free Uncalibrated ˜vbIAC −GF
> ϕxϕyϕz
> T˜vbIAC −GF -ˆTbd˜vdˆTbd(˜ vd×)∈R3×3
> M7 GNSS-free Uncalibrated ˜vbIAC −GF
> ϕxϕyϕz
> T|| ˜vd|| − ( ˆTbd˜vd)x
> 100  ˆTbd(˜ vd×)∈R1×3

Fig. 5: Block diagram of the noising pipeline applied to the GT DVL measurements to generate noised DVL measurements with misalignment errors and the reference GNSS measure-ments. 

B. Validation Procedure 

To sufficiently evaluate the accuracy of the proposed IAC approaches against the baseline methods, a noising pipeline was employed for two purposes. First, common DVL error terms were introduced to the recorded DVL measurements to generate unit-under-test (UUT) noised DVL measurements representative of a real-world calibration scenario. Second, since neither dataset includes GNSS velocity measurements, reference GNSS velocity measurements were generated for the evaluation process. To generate the UUT DVL measurements, the error terms applied to the DVL include scale-factor, biases, zero-mean Gaussian white noise, and misalignment errors between the DVL and body frames. These error terms are common DVL error sources and are representative of the characteristics of real-world DVL measurements [22, 31, 38, 44]. To generate the reference GNSS velocity measurements, only zero-mean Gaussian white noise was added to the GT velocity. The noising pipeline, together with the corresponding DVL and GNSS error models, was adopted from [31]. It is important to note that the generated UUT DVL measurements are derived from real-world DVL data collected during sea experiments rather than from simulated data. Consequently, the validation trajectories preserve the characteristics and dynamics of real-world operations. Figure 5 illustrates the employed noising pipeline. There, the velocity vbGT corresponds to the ground truth (GT) DVL velocity vector. In addition, the misalignment errors are introduced indirectly through small Euler-angle perturbations, denoted by δθ . The values selected for the error terms utilized in the noising pipeline to generate the UUT DVL measurements are presented in Table II, which includes five Euler-angle perturbation variations, three scale-factor variations, one DVL bias variation, and one DVL and GNSS zero-mean Gaussian white noise standard deviation (STD) value. TABLE II: Error term combinations used in the validation procedure.                                      

> Error term parameter Error term combination values Number of combinations
> δθ [°][5 ,−0.5,2.5] ,[0 .5,1,−1.5] ,
> [−2.5,1.8,4] ,[−1,−2.5,−3] ,
> [2 ,0.5,4.2]
> 5
> δk [%] [0 .5,0.3,0.7] ,[0 .2,0.7,0.6] ,
> [0 .9,0.5,0.1] 3
> bDV L [m/s ][0 .007 ,0.001 ,0.003 ,0.009] 1
> σDV L [m/s ]5·10 −31
> σGN SS [m/s ]0.21

By combining the five Euler-angle perturbation variations with the three scale-factor variations, fifteen different DVL error-term combinations are obtained and evaluated. Although the DVL bias variation and DVL noise STD value do not con-tribute to the number of combinations, they are included in all evaluations to ensure that the generated UUT DVL measure-ments reflect realistic DVL measurement characteristics. For the GNSS measurements, only a single zero-mean Gaussian white noise STD value is considered, since the primary focus of this study is the evaluation of DVL calibration under different DVL error conditions, particularly scale-factor errors and DVL-to-body-frame misalignment. To thoroughly evaluate the proposed IAC approaches, a cross-validation-based evaluation procedure based on four evalu-ation sets was employed. The complete dataset of fifteen trajectories was divided into four evaluation sets, E1 to E4, each defined by a different calibration trajectory. In each set, the selected calibration trajectory is used to estimate the DVL error terms, while the remaining fourteen trajectories are used for evaluation after being calibrated with the estimated error terms. The four calibration trajectories are denoted as C1 to C4 and correspond to T12, T13, T14, and T15, respectively. They were selected because they, or segments of their recorded data, exhibit straight-line, near-constant-velocity dynamics, which constitute the required calibration trajectory dynamics in this work. Consequently, for each evaluation set, the fourteen remaining trajectories consist of all trajectories except the selected calibration trajectory. Table III provides a detailed description of the four evaluation sets, including their calibration and evaluation trajectories. Note that when C1, corresponding to T12, is selected as the calibration trajectory, only its first 200 seconds are utilized. This is because only the first 200 seconds of T12 exhibit the straight-line dynamics required by the calibration procedure. This can be visually observed in Figure 4a. Using the four evaluation sets and the fifteen DVL error-7

TABLE III: Calibration and evaluation trajectories in each evaluation set.             

> Evaluation set Calib. trajectory Utilized calib. time window Evaluated trajectories E1 C1 0-200 [sec] T1 to T11, C2, C3, C4 E2 C2 All T1 to T11, C1, C3, C4 E3 C3 All T1 to T11, C1, C2, C4 E4 C4 All T1 to T11, C1, C2, C3

term combinations, the following evaluation procedure is performed: 1) Step 1 : Select one of the four evaluation sets, E1 to E4. 2) Step 2 : Select an error-term combination (Table II) and apply it to all 15 trajectories. 3) Step 3 : Estimate the DVL error terms using the calibra-tion trajectory associated with the evaluation set selected in Step 1 .4) Step 4 : Use the estimated DVL error terms to calibrate the remaining 14 trajectories. 5) Step 5 : Evaluate the method performance by comparing the calibrated velocities with the GT velocities. 6) Step 6 : Repeat Steps 2 - 5 for all error-term combinations. 7) Step 7 : Repeat Steps 1 - 6 for all evaluation sets. The above evaluation procedure is performed for all ap-proaches, including the baseline models, M1 and M2, and the proposed IAC approaches, M3 to M7. The average velocity values of the four calibration trajectories, expressed in the body frame, are presented in Table IV. The diversity in their average velocity and duration enables a comprehensive assessment of the robustness and performance of the differ-ent approaches under a wide range of operating conditions. However, for the IAC-GF approaches, an approximation of TABLE IV: Calibration trajectories with average values of the velocity components.                

> Calib. Trajectory Average Surge Velocity [m/s ]
> Average Sway Velocity [m/s ]
> Average Heave Velocity [m/s ]
> C1 2.04 -0.08 -0.01 C2 2.07 -0.17 -0.01 C3 1.49 -0.1 -0.02 C4 1.49 -0.13 -0.01

the sway and heave velocity components is still required, as described in (35). To this end, the sway and heave components are approximated by averaging the first two seconds of the calibration trajectory, and the resulting average values are used during the calibration process in Step 3 of the evaluation procedure. This simple heuristic enables a true end-to-end GNSS-free DVL self-calibration procedure, as it eliminates the need for any external reference velocity or additional external information during calibration. 

C. Performance Metrics 

To evaluate the calibration accuracy of each approach, first the velocity root mean squared error (VRMSE) is calculated for each one of the fourteen calibrated evaluation trajectories mentioned in Step 5 of the evaluation procedure. The VRMSE is defined as: VRMSE (vbj , ˆvbj ) = 

vuut 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

|| vbi,j − ˜vbi,j || 2 (47) where vbj is the GT velocity of evaluation trajectory j, and 

ˆvb is the corresponding calibrated velocity obtained using the estimated error terms. To assess the calibration accuracy of a given method over a complete evaluation cycle, that is, after completing Steps 2 to 6 and evaluating all error-term combinations for a given evaluation set, the average VRMSE (Avg.VRMSE) is calculated as follows: Avg.VRMSE Ee = (48) 

= 115 

> 15

X

> k=1

[ 114 

> 14

X

> j

VRMSE (vbj , ˆvbj )] 

where Avg.VRMSE Ee is the average VRMSE obtained for evaluation set Ee, with Ee ∈ { E1, E 2, E 3, E 4}. The index j

denotes one of the fourteen evaluation trajectories considered in Step 5, while k denotes the evaluated error-term combina-tion from Step 2. Therefore, (48) represents the performance metric of a given method for a specific evaluation set. 

D. GNSS IAC Results 

First, we evaluate the proposed M3 and M4 linear Kalman filter models performance in terms of the estimated state error and the corresponding single standard deviation covariance sleeve. Figure 6 presents the covariance sleeve and estimation error for each state in M3 and M4. It shows that the state estimation error remains well within the error-state covariance sleeve when using the 200-second calibration segment of C1. Similar behavior was observed for the other calibration trajectories, C2 to C4, corresponding to evaluation sets E2 to E4, and is therefore omitted for brevity. Table V presents the Avg.VRMSE values, in [m/s ], obtained from the validation procedure for each of the four evaluation sets using (48). From TABLE V: Average VRMSE values, in [m/s ], obtained for evaluation sets E1 to E4 using the proposed validation proce-dure. Numeric values in parentheses indicate the improvement relative to M2. The calibration trajectory associated with each evaluation set is indicated in parentheses as C1 to C4 in parentheses.                                 

> Eval. set (Calib. traj.) Model M1 M2 M3 (Ours) M4 (Ours) E1 (C1) [m/s ]0.0522 0.0421 0.0342 0.04 E2 (C2) [m/s ]0.0416 0.0396 0.0294 0.0371 E3 (C3) [m/s ]0.0550 0.0391 0.0304 0.0328 E4 (C4) [m/s ]0.0529 0.0411 0.0564 0.0413 Average [m/s ]0.0504 0.0405 0.0323 (20.12 %)0.0378 (6.65 %)

Table V, three main observations can be made. First, baseline model M2 achieves better performance than M1. Therefore, the improvements of the proposed approaches, shown in paren-theses, are reported relative to M2. Second, both proposed IAC approaches, M3 and M4, provide more accurate calibration on average. Third, M3 achieves the best overall improvement, 8

(a) Model M3 (b) Model M4 

Fig. 6: State estimation of models M3 (left) and M4 (right) during calibration using trajectory C1. In both figures, the blue curves represent the state estimation error, computed as the difference between the estimated state and its average value, while the red curves represent the square root of the estimated state error covariance, corresponding to the covariance sleeve. In both figures, the first three rows show the estimated misalignment errors, ϕx, ϕy , and ϕz , while the last row shows the estimated scale factor, δk for M3, and δk x for M4. with an average accuracy gain of 20 .12% . Fourth, both M3 and M4 achieve an average improvement of 13 .4% compared to the best baseline M2. Furthermore, when comparing each IAC model to its corresponding baseline, M3 improves by an average of 35 .8% over M1, while M4 improves by 6.7% over M2, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed IAC. A key observation is that the only modification introduced in M3 and M4 relative to M1 and M2 was setting the Z velocity component to zero, without altering any Kalman filter param-eters, further highlighting the robustness and applicability of the proposed approach. To further evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed IAC models, the validation procedure was repeated while con-trolling the allowed calibration duration. The following cal-ibration durations were analyzed: tcalib = [50 , 100 , 120 , 140 

, 160 , 180 , 200 , t end ][sec] , where tcalib = 200[sec] corresponds to the full calibration duration of C1, but not of the other three trajectories, C2 to C4. Therefore, tcalib = tend denotes using the entire available calibration trajectory, which corresponds to the results presented in Table V. Figure 7 presents the average Avg.VRMSE for each allowed calibration duration, obtained by averaging the Avg.VRMSE values corresponding to the four evaluation sets. Only baseline model M2 is shown as baseline, as Table V demonstrated its superiority over M1. From Figure 7, three main observations can be made. First, all three models, M2, M3, and M4, demonstrate a convergence behaviour in which the VRMSE decreases as the calibration time increases. Second, M4 consistently outperforms its base-line model, M2. Third, M3 achieves the best results for the longest allowed calibration time, that is, tcalib = tend , which differs between the calibration trajectories. However, when considering a fixed allowed calibration time of 200 seconds, it is evident that M3 and M4 outperform the baseline M2 and 

Fig. 7: The average VRMSE over all calibration trajectories averaged across all fifteen error terms combinations. achieve better results. Overall, the proposed IAC approaches improve calibration accuracy, with M3 providing the best performance in both accuracy and calibration time reduction. 

E. GNSS-Free IAC Results 

To evaluate the IAC-GF approaches, we analyzed the state estimation error and the square root of the error state covari-ance sleeve. Figure 8 presents the state error and covariance sleeve for the sample calibration trajectory C1 from evalua-tion set E1. It shows that the state estimation error remains bounded within one standard deviation of the covariance sleeve. However, M7 exhibits a slight bias, which is expected since the calibration is performed without external aiding. In the GNSS-free calibration scenario, the uncalibrated solution serves as the baseline. Therefore, for the uncalibrated case, the evaluation procedure is executed only once, with Steps 9

(a) Model M5 (b) Model M6 (c) Model M7 

Fig. 8: State estimation of models M5 (left), M6 (middle), and M7 (right) during calibration using trajectory C1. In all three figures, the blue curves represent the state estimation error, computed as the difference between the estimated state and its average value, while the red curves represent the square root of the estimated state error covariance, corresponding to the covariance sleeve. In all three figures, the three rows show the estimated misalignment errors, ϕx, ϕy , and ϕz .2 and 3 omitted. Consequently, the uncalibrated velocities of the fourteen evaluation trajectories are directly compared with the GT velocities in Step 5. To further evaluate the DVL self-calibration accuracy, the validation procedure was repeated using the maximum available calibration duration for each calibration trajectory, that is, the full available calibration segment. Table VI presents the Avg.VRMSE results obtained using (48) for each evaluation set, together with the overall average. TABLE VI: Average VRMSE values, in [m /s] , of the proposed IAC in GNSS-denied environments models comparing the uncalibrated velocity as baseline.                           

> Eval. set (Calib. traj) Model Uncalibrated M5 (Ours) M6 (Ours) M7 (Ours) E1 (C1) [m/s ]0.1185 0.0665 0.0646 0.0625 E2 (C2) [m/s ]0.1173 0.0893 0.0945 0.0739 E3 (C3) [m/s ]0.1197 0.0634 0.0625 0.0798 E4 (C4) [m/s ]0.1197 0.1058 0.1229 0.0888 Average [m/s ]0.1188 0.0813 0.0861 0.0762

Table VI shows that all three proposed IAC-GF approaches outperform the uncalibrated baseline. Moreover, when C1 and C3 are used as the calibration trajectories in evaluation sets E1 and E3, respectively, models M5 and M6 achieve nearly half the Avg.VRMSE of the uncalibrated baseline. However, when C4 is used as the calibration trajectory in E4, the improvement achieved by M5 and M6 is less pronounced. These observa-tions indicate that the proposed heuristic for approximating the sway and heave components, based on the initial two seconds of data, provides a reasonable estimate of the missing velocity components. Nevertheless, M7 delivers consistent performance across all evaluation sets, despite estimating all three states using only the surge (X-axis) measurement. To further assess the effectiveness of the IAC-GF approaches, Figure 9 presents the average Avg.VRMSE improvement rel-ative to the uncalibrated baseline, computed from the results reported in Table VI. It shows that M7 achieves the largest improvement, approximately 35% , followed by M5 with about 

31% and M6 with approximately 27% . Overall, the proposed IAC-GF approaches achieve an average improvement of ap-

Fig. 9: Proposed GNSS-free IAC approaches, M5, M6, and M7, improvements over the uncalibrated DVL baseline. proximately 30% , despite the absence of GNSS reference measurements. These results highlight two key outcomes of the proposed IAC-GF framework. First, the proposed IAC-GF assumptions are validated, demonstrating their applicability and robustness. Second, M7 enables GNSS-free DVL self-calibration using only the velocity norm and the simpli-fied error model, highlighting the practicality and simplicity of the proposed approach. Together, Table VI and Figure 9 demonstrate that the proposed self-calibration approaches enable DVL calibration in GNSS-denied environments and provide a significantly better alternative to uncalibrated DVL measurements, which would otherwise lead to rapid navigation drift. V. C ONCLUSIONS 

Despite the importance of accurate DVL calibration, tra-ditional Kalman filter-based calibration approaches neither utilize information aiding to improve accuracy nor enable calibration when GNSS signals are unavailable. To address these limitations, this work proposed two IAC frameworks for both GNSS scenarios. In GNSS-enabled environments, the core novelty of our proposed IAC-G framework relies on approximating the Z component of the GNSS velocity expressed in the DVL frame as zero to improve calibration 10 

accuracy. In GNSS-denied environments, our proposed IAC-GF framework tackles DVL calibration by combining a sim-plified error model, an assumption on the sway and heave components, and an approximation of the surge component to construct an a reference velocity for calibration, thereby enabling GNSS-free DVL self-calibration. Nevertheless, the proposed approaches rely on assumptions regarding the DVL Z-axis installation and approximations made as part of the IAC-GF framework for reconstructing the missing velocity components, which may be difficult to satisfy in practice. Despite these limitations, our proposed IAC approaches im-prove calibration accuracy in both GNSS scenarios. In GNSS-enabled environments, two proposed models, M3 and M4, achieve up to a 20% improvement over the best Kalman filter baseline. In GNSS-denied environments, the proposed IAC-GF approaches result in three novel models that achieve an average improvement of 30% and up to 34% compared to the uncalibrated baseline. Moreover, model M7 does not require prior knowledge yet achieves an impressive 35% improvement, enabling fully standalone GNSS-free DVL self-calibration. All proposed approaches were validated using two separate real-world sea experiments, demonstrating their robustness and applicability. These results demonstrate that the proposed IAC frameworks enable more accurate and efficient DVL calibration in both GNSS scenarios, particularly the proposed IAC-GF frame-work, which enables DVL self-calibration in GNSS-denied environments. The immediate outcome of the proposed IAC frameworks is improved navigation accuracy and reduced drift, which subsequently support higher-quality data collection and improved mission reliability. More broadly, this work introduces a novel information-aided paradigm for underwa-ter navigation, opening new research directions in low-cost sensor integration, information-aided navigation pipelines, and enhancing marine research capabilities and data validity. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

Z.Y. is supported by the Maurice Hatter Foundation and University of Haifa presidential scholarship for outstanding students on a direct Ph.D. track. REFERENCES 

[1] H. Feng, J. Yu, Y. Huang, J. Cui, J. Qiao, Z. Wang, Z. Xie, and K. Ren, “Automatic tracking method for submarine cables and pipelines of AUV based on side scan sonar,” Ocean Engineering , vol. 280, p. 114689, 2023. [2] S. B. Williams, O. R. Pizarro, M. V. Jakuba, C. R. Johnson, N. S. Barrett, R. C. Babcock, G. A. Kendrick, P. D. Steinberg, A. J. Heyward, P. J. Doherty et al. ,“Monitoring of benthic reference sites: using an au-tonomous underwater vehicle,” IEEE Robotics & Au-tomation Magazine , vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 73–84, 2012. [3] L. D. Barker, M. V. Jakuba, A. D. Bowen, C. R. German, T. Maksym, L. Mayer, A. Boetius, P. Dutrieux, and L. L. Whitcomb, “Scientific challenges and present capabilities in underwater robotic vehicle design and navigation for oceanographic exploration under-ice,” Remote Sensing ,vol. 12, no. 16, p. 2588, 2020. [4] R. B. Wynn, V. A. Huvenne, T. P. Le Bas, B. J. Murton, D. P. Connelly, B. J. Bett, H. A. Ruhl, K. J. Morris, J. Peakall, D. R. Parsons et al. , “Autonomous Under-water Vehicles (AUVs): Their past, present and future contributions to the advancement of marine geoscience,” 

Marine geology , vol. 352, pp. 451–468, 2014. [5] P. Ridao, M. Carreras, D. Ribas, and R. Garcia, “Visual inspection of hydroelectric dams using an autonomous underwater vehicle,” Journal of Field Robotics , vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 759–778, 2010. [6] P. Liu, B. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Zhu, and J. Liang, “A positioning error correction method for dead-reckoning navigation of underwater vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , 2025. [7] Y. Miao, X. Liu, Y. Sun, X. Liu, C. Shen, C. Wang, J. Tang, and J. Liu, “Physics-guided adaptive UKF for robust AUV integrated navigation under degraded un-derwater observations,” Ocean Engineering , vol. 362, p. 126542, 2026. [8] G. Sheng, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, Q. Shao, H. Xu, X. Cheng, and X. Yuan, “The EKF-based SINS/DVL integrated nav-igation for AUV on lie group under hovring condition,” 

Ocean Engineering , vol. 325, p. 120742, 2025. [9] D. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Yao, T. Zhang, and Y. Zhu, “A novel SINS/DVL tightly integrated navigation method for complex environment,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumen-tation and Measurement , vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 5183–5196, 2019. [10] N. Cohen and I. Klein, “Seamless Underwater Naviga-tion with Limited Doppler Velocity Log Measurements,” 

IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , pp. 1–12, 2024. [11] L. Luo, Y. Huang, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, and L. Tang, “An on-line full-parameters calibration method for SINS/DVL integrated navigation system,” IEEE Sensors Journal ,vol. 23, no. 24, pp. 30 927–30 939, 2023. [12] L. Qian, F. Qin, A. Li, K. Li, and J. Zhu, “An INS/DVL integrated navigation filtering method against complex underwater environment,” Ocean Engineering , vol. 278, p. 114398, 2023. [13] M. I. Ribeiro, “Kalman and extended kalman filters: Concept, derivation and properties,” Institute for Systems and Robotics , vol. 43, no. 46, pp. 3736–3741, 2004. [14] N. Cohen and I. Klein, “Adaptive Kalman-informed transformer,” Engineering Applications of Artificial In-telligence , vol. 146, p. 110221, 2025. [15] E. A. Wan and R. Van Der Merwe, “The unscented Kalman filter for nonlinear estimation,” in Proceedings 11 

of the IEEE 2000 adaptive systems for signal process-ing, communications, and control symposium (Cat. No. 00EX373) . Ieee, 2000, pp. 153–158. [16] A. Levy and I. Klein, “Adaptive neural unscented Kalman filter,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , 2026. [17] B. Diker and I. Klein, “Neural Aided Adaptive Innovation-Based Invariant Kalman Filter,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.26709 , 2026. [18] B. Braginsky, A. Baruch, and H. Guterman, “Correction of DVL error caused by seafloor gradient,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 20, no. 19, pp. 11 652–11 659, 2020. [19] S. Pan, X. Xu, Y. Yao, L. Zhang, and M. Xia, “A novel DVL aided inertial navigation strategy for long-endurance robust positioning of AUVs,” IEEE Transac-tions on Intelligent Vehicles , 2024. [20] Z. Ning, X. Pan, and W. Wu, “Research on fast calibra-tion and moving base alignment of SINS/DVL-integrated navigation system,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 6035–6047, 2023. [21] D. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Yang, and T. Zhang, “A quasi-Newton quaternions calibration method for DVL error aided GNSS,” IEEE transactions on vehicular technol-ogy , vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 2465–2477, 2021. [22] D. Li, J. Xu, B. Zhu, and H. He, “A calibration method of DVL in integrated navigation system based on particle swarm optimization,” Measurement , vol. 187, p. 110325, 2022. [23] S. Liu, T. Zhang, and Y. Zhu, “A GNSS Aided Cali-bration Method for DVL Error Based on the Optimal-REQUEST,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 22, no. 22, pp. 21 899–21 910, 2022. [24] S. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Chen, Y. Ben, and Z. Wang, “A novel GPS-aided robust calibration method for SINS/DVL inte-grated navigation system,” IEEE Sensors Journal , 2025. [25] B. Xu, L. Wang, S. Li, and J. Zhang, “A novel calibra-tion method of SINS/DVL integration navigation system based on quaternion,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 20, no. 16, pp. 9567–9580, 2020. [26] B. Xu and Y. Guo, “A novel DVL calibration method based on robust invariant extended Kalman filter,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 71, no. 9, pp. 9422–9434, 2022. [27] D. Wang, B. Wang, H. Huang, and Y. Yao, “Online calibration method of DVL error based on improved integrated navigation model,” IEEE Sensors Journal ,vol. 22, no. 21, pp. 21 082–21 092, 2022. [28] J. Huang, H. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, and Y. Chen, “GNSS-aided installation error compensation for DVL/INS integrated navigation system using error-state Kalman filter,” Measurement , vol. 242, p. 116224, 2025. [29] H. Zhang, C. Li, T. Zhang, G. Wang, and D. Wang, “Novel algorithm for the calibration of DVL in under-water integrated navigation system,” Ocean Engineering ,vol. 353, p. 124676, 2026. [30] B. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Deng, and M. Fu, “A model-free calibration method of inertial navigation system and Doppler sensors,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2219–2229, 2020. [31] Z. Yampolsky and I. Klein, “DCNet: A data-driven framework for DVL calibration,” Applied Ocean Re-search , vol. 158, p. 104525, 2025. [32] D. Engelsman and I. Klein, “Information-aided inertial navigation: A review,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumen-tation and Measurement , vol. 72, pp. 1–18, 2023. [33] P. D. Groves, “Principles of GNSS,” Inertial, and Multi-sensor Integrated Navigation Systems , vol. 521, 2008. [34] Y. Yao, X. Xu, and X. Xu, “An IMM-aided ZUPT methodology for an INS/DVL integrated navigation sys-tem,” Sensors , vol. 17, no. 9, p. 2030, 2017. [35] G. Wahba, “A least squares estimate of satellite attitude,” 

SIAM review , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 409–409, 1965. [36] S. Umeyama, “Least-squares estimation of transforma-tion parameters between two point patterns,” IEEE Trans-actions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence ,vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 376–380, 2002. [37] D. W. Eggert, A. Lorusso, and R. B. Fisher, “Estimating 3-D rigid body transformations: a comparison of four ma-jor algorithms,” Machine vision and applications , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 272–290, 1997. [38] G. Damari and I. Klein, “ResAlignNet: A data-driven approach for INS/DVL alignment,” Ocean Engineering ,vol. 356, p. 125277, 2026. [39] D. Titterton and J. L. Weston, Strapdown inertial navi-gation technology . IET, 2004, vol. 17. [40] Y. Bar-Shalom, X. R. Li, and T. Kirubarajan, Estimation with applications to tracking and navigation: theory algorithms and software . John Wiley & Sons, 2001. [41] Z. Paul and M. Howard, “Fundamentals of kalman filtering: A practical approach,” Virginia, Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics ,p. 80, 2005. [42] Snapir auv. [Online]. Available: https://marsci.haifa.ac. il/en/ocean-instruments/ [43] N. Cohen and I. Klein, “BeamsNet: A data-driven ap-proach enhancing Doppler velocity log measurements for autonomous underwater vehicle navigation,” Engineer-ing Applications of Artificial Intelligence , vol. 114, p. 105216, 2022. [44] Waterlink a50 dvl. [Online]. Available: https://www. waterlinked.com/shop/dvl-a50-1248