Title: 2606.17242v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.17242v1

Published Time: Wed, 17 Jun 2026 00:09:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 63

Markdown Content:
1

# Landsat -Sentinel -2 a lgal bloom mapping using Vision Transformer s: model 

# description, implementation , and examples 

Thainara M. A. Lima a,* , Vitor S. Martins a,*     

> aDepartment of Agricultural & Biological Engineering, Mississippi State University (MSU), Starkville, MS 39762,
> USA.
> *Corresponding author, E -mails: tml411@msstate.edu (Thainara M. A. Lima) and vmartins@abe.msstate.edu (Vitor
> S. Martins)

Abstract 

Coastal algal bloom monitoring requires frequent, spatially detailed, and globally consistent 

observations provided by Landsat -8/9 and Sentinel -2 A/B/C. Together, these missions provide 

more than a decade of medium -resolution multispectral imagery with nea r-global coverage every 

2-3 days, enabling detection of fragmented bloom structures not resolvable by coarse ocean -color 

sensors. However, their use in aquatic environments remains challenging due to limited spectral 

coverage and the lack of harmonized ref lectance products. As an alternative to traditional bio -

optical methods, deep learning -based image classification provides a data -driven approach that 

can overcome many of these limitations. This study presents, for the first time, a successful 

implementat ion of vision transformer -based coastal algal bloom mapping using 30 -m Landsat -

Sentinel -2 images. A globally distributed algal bloom patch dataset (24,265 training and 12,255 

validation patches, each 30m 256×256 pixels) was generated in coastal algal bloom -prone hotspots 

worldwide. Four transformer -based architectures, Vanilla Vision Transformer, Swin Transformer, 

SegFormer, and Masked Autoencoders, were implemented and compared against a standard 

convolutional baseline model (ResUNet) for fine -scale bloom detection. The models were assessed 

under different optical water types, atmospheric, and surface conditions. In general, all deep 

learning models demonstrated great capabilities in detecting floating algal bloom areas, with 

omission and commission errors ranging from 8% to 65% . When evaluated under cloud and glint 

stress conditions in a time series, the Swin Transformer outperformed traditional spectral -index 

approaches, which produced widespread false positives, while the deep learning model effectively 

avoided cloud - and glint -affected pixels. Additionally, comparisons with MODIS -derived 

products highlighted the benefits of a higher spatial resolution algal bloom product in detecting 

fragmented and irregularly affected bloom areas. Our findin gs support the new frontier of deep 2

learning models as a reliable tool for medium -resolution, consistent monitoring of floating algal 

blooms in dynamic coastal environments. 

Keyword s: Coastal waters, aquatic remote sensing , global model, deep learning appl ications ,

multi -sensor, medium resolution. 

1. Introduction 

Algal blooms, defined as a rapid, large -scale accumulation of micro - or macroalgae in the upper 

water column, can occur across diverse coastal environments, with more than 5,000 species 

documented globally ( Smith et al., 2003; Blondeau -Patissier et al., 2014; Gernez et al., 2023). 

Bloom events can emerge abruptly and are projected to increase with climate change, emphasizing 

the urgent need for a scalable coastal algal bloom monitoring (A nderson et al., 2009, 2012 , 2019; 

Barton et al., 2016 ; Gobler, 2020; Hallegraeff et al., 2021 ). Satellite ocean color remote sensing 

provides multi -spectral datasets for detecting and tracking algal bloom event s, documenting when 

and where they occur, and making it possible to understand and monitor their spatial and temporal 

dynamics (Gower et al., 2008; IOCCG, 2021; Dai et al., 2023). Ocean color sensors such as the 

Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS ), Medium Resolution Imaging 

Spectrometer ( MERIS ), Medium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer ( CZCS ), Sea -viewing Wide 

Field -of -view Sensor (SeaWiFS ), and Ocean and Land Color Instrument (OLCI ) have 

demonstrated strong capabilities for monitoring high -biomass blooms at synoptic scales 

(Bl ondeau -Patissier et al., 2014; IOCCG, 2021) . Additionally, several studies have been focus ing 

on high -biomass blooms dominated by a single species in specific regions, for example, Sargassum 

in the Intra -Americas Sea and Atlantic (Gower and King, 2011; Gow er et al., 2013; Wang and Hu, 

2016), Karenia brevis in the Gulf of America (Tomlinson et al., 2009), and Trichodesmium in 

Australian waters (Blondeau -Patissier et al., 2018). Recently, Dai et al. (2023) demonstrated a 

global -scale bloom mapping using MODIS and unsupervised anomaly detection, which is one of 

the first studies providing daily bloom -affected area masks. While ocean color products support 

broad -scale monitoring, their moderate spatial resolution limits the detection of small, fragmented, 

or low -concentration blooms, which often form as clumps, mats, or rafts smaller than a single pixel 

(Ody et al., 2019; Qi and Hu, 2021; Wang et al., 2021). 3

Additionally, a ccurately retrieving water reflectance from coarse -resolution sensors remains 

challenging , particularly in coastal zones where bottom reflectance in shallow waters, high 

concentrations of suspended particles, and land adjacency effects introduce significant 

uncertainties (Odermatt et al., 2012; Bulgarelli and Zibordi, 2018; Wang and Hu, 202 1a ; Xu et al., 

2023; Pahlevan et al., 2024 ). As a result, these uncertainties propagate into the problems of bloom 

detection using simple threshold -based spectral index mapping or deriving the chlorophyll -a

concentrations (Darecki and Stramski, 2004; Hu, 2009; Blondeau -Patissier et al., 2014; Wang and 

Hu, 2021 b, 2023 ; Podsosonnaya et al., 2025 ). As an alternative , attempts have been made to use 

high - and medium -resolution satellites, such as WorldView -2, Sentinel -2, Landsat -8/9, and Spot7 

to study coastal areas at local scales (Qi et al., 2019; Qi and Hu, 2021; Wang and Hu, 2021 b; Ma 

et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022). Medium spatial resolution sensors like NASA's Landsat -8/9 

Operational Land Imager (OLI) and ESA's Sentinel -2 Multispectral Imager (MSI) offer global, 

consistent observations for scalable algal bloom products (Pahlevan et al., 2017 a, 2019 ; Wang and 

Hu, 2021 a). Their combined use through the Harmonized Landsat -Sentinel (HLS) virtual 

constellation enables near -global coverage every 2 –3 days (Claverie et al., 2018 ; Ju et al., 2025; 

Zh ou et al., 2025 ), bringing a unique opportunity for the timely detection of the rapid proliferation 

of algal blooms. Yet, the utility of HLS in aquatic environments demands specific image 

processing and radiometric corrections (Page et al., 2019; Cao et al ., 2022) , and implementing 

these methods is essential to expand the application of multi -mission satellite data for coastal 

monitoring. If successful, medium spatial resolution observations (5 -30 meters) may enable 

mapping of small and irregular bloom areas, not detected by moderate (30 -250 m) or coarse 

(>250 m) resolution sensors , revealing coastal bloom dynamics and seasonal patterns that were 

never explored (Hu et al., 2009; Hu et al., 2016; Cui et al., 2018; Wang and Hu, 2016; 2021 a, 

2021b ; Descloitres et al., 2021; Qi and Hu, 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Qi et al., 2023). 

Through the years, s everal techniques have been developed to identify algal blooms using optical 

satellite observations , including band -ratio algorithms, spectral indices, bio -optical and analytical 

models, supervised classification, and principal component analysis ( Kislik et al., 2022; Alharbi, 

2023 ; Colkesen et al., 2024 ). Among these, spectral indices such as the Normalized Difference 

Chlorophyll Index ( NDVI ) (Mishra and Mishra, 2012 ; Kislik et al., 2022 ), Floating Algae Index 

(FAI) (Hu, 2009; Wang and Hu, 2016) , Surface Algal Bloom Index (SABI) (Alawadi, 2010) , and 4

Maximum Chlorophyll Index (MCI) (Gower et al., 2007) are wid ely used to detect affected bloom 

pixels with empirical thresholds or to model chlorophyll -a concentrations (Tran et al., 2023). 

However, even minor uncertainties in retrieved water reflectance can significantly compromise 

the reliability of temporal analyses based on spectral indices (Morel and Belanger, 2006; 

Caballero, 2020; Zahir et al., 2024). As a result, these methods require extensive preprocessing to 

remove clouds and distinguish non -algal features with similar spectral signatures (Hu et al., 

2023 b). Additionally, w hile spectral indices only rely on spectral information, ignoring spatial 

context information , deep learning (D L) semantic segmentation algorithms have emerged as a 

powerful tool in remote sensing that can effectively use both spectral and spatial features for 

context -aware classification ( Li et al., 2020 ; Wang and Hu, 2021 b; Yao et al., 2024 ). These 

semantic segmentation models use a subset of images, i.e., image patches , as input data to explore 

hierarchical and discriminative features , such as edges, texture, and color , during classification (Lv 

et al., 2023 ). Although DL has proven applications in remote sensing (Ma et al., 2019; Arellano -

Verdejo et al., 2019; Hordiiuk et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Wang and Hu, 2021 b; Cao et al., 

2022; Laval et al., 2023), its use for algal bloom mapping remains emergent, with few studies 

detailin g labeling protocols and no publicly available reference datasets. 

State -of -the -art DL approaches predominantly rely on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), 

which use learnable kernels to extract hierarchical spatial features from input images (Maggiori e t

al., 2017) . Among these, the U-Net architecture, originally developed for biomedical 

segmentation, has proven effective for water body analysis due to its encoder -decoder structure 

and ability to capture multiscale contextual features (Jakovljevic et al., 2020; Qi et al., 2021; Wang 

and Hu, 2021 b; Hu et al., 2023 b; Yao et al., 2024 ; Wang et al., 2026 ). More recently, Vision 

Transformers (ViTs) have gained attention in remote sensing for their ability to model global 

relationships via self -attention mec hanisms, surpassing the locality limitations of CNNs (Gao et 

al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022). To date, no studies have applied ViT models to algal bloom 

segmentation, and it remains unknown if they are useful to accurately detect bloom -affected areas 

and how well they can generalize across different optical water types; our study addresses these 

gaps . Similarly , foundation models have emerged as a new paradigm for geospatial AI (Lu et al., 

2025 ). For instance, Prithvi is the latest IBM/NASA foundational model (Jakubik et al., 2023 ;

Szwarcman et al., 2024 ) pre -trained on vast Earth observation datasets using self -supervised 5

learning. The se foundational model s can be fine -tuned for a wide range of downstream tasks with 

minim um labeled data, off ering scalability and transferability (Xiao et al., 2024) . Its application 

was never evaluated in aquatic remote sensing , and e xploring such a model in the context of algal 

bloom mapping holds a new frontier for coastal science and expands the possibilities with medium 

spatial resolution satellite data sources .

This study presents the first implementation of ViT models for 30 -m coastal algal bloom mapping 

using harmonized Landsat -8/9 OLI and Sentinel -2 MSI data worldwide. The study has two 

prima ry objectives: (i) to integrate Landsat -Sentinel -2 images in a seamless water reflectance 

product and develop a globally representative 30 -m algal bloom mask reference dataset, and (ii) 

implement and evaluate the applicability of novel vision transformers for 30 -m coastal algal bloom 

mapping in distinct optically complex waters. We generated harmonized Landsat -8/9 and Sentinel -

2 atmospherically corrected images ( a total of 660 in 2023 an d 18 6 in 2024) for aquatic 

applications, and created a globally distributed algal bloom patch dataset (24,265 patches for 

training and 12 ,255 for validation, with 30m 256× 256 -pixel patches) across diverse coastal 

environments on all continents. This algal bloom reference dataset was then used as the foundation 

for training and benchmarking a suite of state -of -the -art DL models, including Transformer -based 

architectures (e.g., Vanilla ViT, Swin Transformer, and SegFormer), Foundational Model Prithvi, 

and enc oder -decoder CNNs (e.g., ResUNet). We evaluated the models’ performance and 

generalization under different scenarios, including bloom -affected areas near high suspended solid 

plumes, clouds, and under sunglint effects. We compared our results with traditio nal threshold -

based spectral indexes, and a moderate spatial resolution algal bloom product. Note that bloom 

events are highly heterogeneous in space and time, from greenish to reddish colors, depending on 

the dominant species (e.g., diatoms or dinoflagell ates) and the concentration of water constituents 

(Dierssen et al., 2006). Kutser (2009) emphasizes the relative nature of the term "bloom," which 

can refer to phytoplankton or macroalgal events with varying biomass levels. This study focuses 

on algal bloo ms (microalgae or macroalgae) that produce saturated, spatially distinct, and textured 

patterns on the water surface, aiming to develop a generic, scalable detection approach, and we do 

not intend to characterize phytoplankton groups, community composition , or relative abundance. 

The main contributions of our study are: (i) the first application of Vision Transformer 

architectures for 30 -m Landsat –Sentinel algal bloom mapping, demonstrating, for the first time, 6

their capability to delineate bloom features i n coastal waters; (ii) the development of a globally 

distributed 30 -m algal bloom mask dataset, together with a scalable semi -automatic labeling 

workflow capable of producing consistent reference masks; and (iii) represents the first step toward 

a potentia l operational 30 -m algal bloom mapping (geographic location, shape, impacted area) in 

coastal waters, which has never been performed. 

2. Landsat -8/9 OLI and Sentinel -2 MSI data 

2.1. Data description 

In this study, we integrated multispectral observations from Landsat -8/9 OLI and Sentinel -2 MSI 

for 30 -m coastal algal bloom mapping. The NASA Landsat program has provided the longest 

continuous record of Earth observations from space, spanning over 50 years since its launch in 

1972 (Wulder et al., 2022) . Landsat -8 and Landsat -9 were launched in 2013 and 2021, 

respectively, and operate in a sun -synchronous orbit with a 16 -day revisit cycle each (Roy et al., 

2014; Masek et al., 2020; Kabir et al., 2023) . Both satellite platforms carry the Operational Land 

Imager (OLI) , a multispectral pushbroom sensor with 9 spectral bands across the visible, NIR, and 

SWIR wavelengths at 30 -meter spatial and 12 -bit radiometric resolutions (Loveland & Irons, 

2016). Together, the two satellites offer an 8-day revisit frequency, using the World Reference 

System -2 and Universal Transverse Mercator ( UTM ) projection. Since 2016, data from Landsat -

8/9 have been distributed as Collection 2 (Claverie et al., 2018), with Level -1 products providing 

calibrated digi tal numbers in 185×185 km tiles that can be converted to top -of -atmosphere (TOA) 

reflectance. 

The Sentinel -2 mission, developed by the European Space Agency (ESA) under the Copernicus 

program, comprises three satellites: Sentinel -2A (launched in 2015), Sentinel -2B (2017), and the 

more recent Sentinel -2C (2024) (Drusch et al., 2012 ). Each satellite carries the Multispectral 

Instrument (MSI) sensor , which captures imagery across 13 spectral bands and delivers products 

in UTM -based Military Grid Refe rence System (MGRS) tiles at various processing levels. MSI 

offers variable spatial resolution: 10 m for four VNIR bands, 20 m for six Red Edge, narrow NIR, 

and SWIR bands, and 60 m for three atmospheric correction bands. Designed for medium spatial 

resolu tion optical land monitoring, the mission provides a 5 -day revisit interval and a 290 km 

swath width (Drusch et al., 2012). The primary product, Level -1C Collection 1, contains top -of -7

atmosphere (TOA) reflectance data in 109 × 109 km tiles. Combined, Lands at -8/9 and Sentinel -

2A/B offer synergistic capabilities and a global median revisit time of 2-3 days (Li and Roy, 2017 ;

Zhou et al., 2025 ). 

2.2. Coastal algal bloom hotspot selection and data acquisition 

For training algal bloom data set generation (Section 3. 3), 225 high -algal -occurrence regions were 

identified across coastal zones , which extend up to 370 km from coastlines, based on a global daily 

MODIS -based algal bloom occurrence product developed by Dai et al. (2023). First, we derive d a 

long -term 2003 -2020 frequency composite map of hotspots to identify candidate regions for algal 

bloom occurrences, highlighted as reddish areas in  Figure 1A, ensuring a worldwide, 

geographically diverse search under varying environmental conditions. All available 2023 

Sentinel -2 A/B and Landsat -8/9 images with less than 30% cloud cover were acquired from 

Google Earth Engine (GEE) for the selected locations. This initial search resulted in a total of 

15,421 images, from which the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (ND VI) (NDVI =

(NIR − Red )/(NIR + Red )), FAI (FAI = Red + (SWIR − Red ) × (𝜆 NIR − 𝜆 Red )/(𝜆 SWIR −

𝜆 Red )), RGB composites (red, green, blue), and false color composites (red, NIR, green) were 

generated for each image. A visual inspection was then conducted, ensuring the inclusion of both 

micro - and macroalgal occurrences, from which 660 images with visible algal bloom were 

selected. For our exp eriments, a single recent year (2023) provided a sufficiently large number of 

algal bloom events for a representative training dataset, encompassing a complete annual cycle 

with images in all seasons, under a broad range of climatic conditions, and varying sun and sensor 

angles, which enables the model to learn robust spectral and spatial representations of algal bloom 

events worldwide. Furthermore, by using a rigorous selection in hotspot regions, we minimized 

the risk of underrepresenting blooms that may vary in their characteristics from year to year, since 

these locations are consistently prone to algal bloom events. Examples of algal bloom occurrences 

are highlighted in Figure 1C. Figure 1A and 1B show the location of each selected image and the 

number of observations per location. We downloaded a total of 281 Level -1 TOA images from 

Landsat (146 from Landsat -8, and 135 from Landsat -9) via the USGS EarthExplorer platform 

using the U SGS/EROS API, and 379 Level -1C TOA reflectance images from Sentinel -2 (184 from 

Sentinel -2A, and 195 from Sentinel -2B ), through the Copernicus Open Access Hub API. These 

660 images (85.9 GB) from 2023 were used in the training dataset generation .8

For validation algal bloom dataset generation, images were selected from 2024 to evaluate the 

temporal transferability of the model in a year not seen during training. Additionally, optical water 

types (OWTs) were included as an additional criterion for se lecting validation site s to assess the 

model ’s generalization and applicability across diverse water conditions . We used the 21 OWTs 

spectral signatures defined by Spyrakos et al. (2018) and grouped them into three broader 

categories using k -means clustering. The categories were defined as: (i) phytoplankton -rich waters 

with elevated chlorophyll concentrations (OWTs 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 10 and 11 in the original paper), (ii) 

turbid waters dominated by high suspended sediment loads (OWTs 4, 5, 9, 12), and (iii) optically 

clear waters with low levels of both particulate and dissolved organic matter (OWTs 3 and 13). 

For each c lass, the mean reflectance spectrum was simulated to MODIS bands and used as 

references in the Spectral Angle Mapper (SAM) classifier (Kruse et al., 1993). The classifier was 

applied to the mean annual composite of 1 km MODIS (MYDOCGA) 16 -day 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 data available 

on GEE to generate a global 2024 OWT map. This map was then used to guide the selection of 

sites representing different water types. A total of 77 OLI images (33 from Landsat -8 and 44 from 

Landsat -9) and 109 MSI images (49 from Sentinel -2A , 58 from Sentinel -2B, and 2 from Sentinel -

2C) were selected and acquired in 2024. These 18 6 images (40.5 GB) were used in the validation 

dataset generation. By focusing on recent image dates (2023 & 2024 , Figure 1B ), our training and 

validation datasets r eflect the most recent algal bloom events and their characteristics. Figure S1 A

presents the mean 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 spectra of each selected image classified according to the three defined 

OWTs using SAM , and Figure 1A shows the geographic distribution of the validation images. 9

Figure 1. Coastal algal bloom hotspots for Landsat and Sentinel data selection, and examples of 

algal bloom events. (A) Sentinel -2/MSI tiles selected for algal bloom reference data generation for 

training (black stars) and validation (red stars). The colored map in the background shows bloom 

occurrence frequency between 2003 -2020, generated from Dai et al. (2023). (B) Number of algal 

bloom occurrences identified in 2023 (green) and 2024 (rose golden), per tile, during visual 

inspection. (C) Examples of visually ident ified blooms. Each example shows the centroid 

coordinates (corners), MGRS tile ID, and acquisition date (bottom), and bloom location as 

indicated in (A). For every true -color image, a corresponding false -color composite (RED, NIR, 

GREEN) is displayed in th e circle. 

3. Method ology 

3.1. Framework overview 

The workflow is illustrated in  Figure 2. First, raw OLI and MSI TOA reflectance data were 

processed by applying our atmospheric correction pipeline, called AQUAVis, to retrieve remote 

sensing reflectance (𝑅 𝑟𝑠 ), defined as the ra tio of water radiance to the total downwelling irradiance 

just above the water surface. In the visible spectrum, 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 is shaped by the optically active 10 

constituents (OACs), providing a fundamental measure of water optical properties and enabling 

consistent comparison across sensors (Mobley, 1999). The retrieved 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 imagery was then used to 

harmonize OLI and MSI data into a single virtual constellation product for aquatic applications .

Second, AQUAVis -derived 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 serve as input data to a semi -automatic algal bloom labeling 

procedure, where a dynamic ND VI-based threshold and an unsupervised object detection approach 

were combined to generate binary gro und truth masks of algal blooms. In the third step, 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 images 

and labeled masks were tiled into patches and used to train and validate different deep learning 

architectures. This phase include d quantitative accuracy assessment and area -based comparison s

of model outputs. Finally, the best -performing architecture was applied to produce a global ly 

applicable algal bloom segmentation model, which was further evaluated under diverse 

atmospheric and water optical conditions. 

Figure 2. General workflow 

3.2. Input dataset pre -processing 11 

We generated a harmonized Landsat -Sentinel -2 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 data following the pipeline proposed 

by Lima et al. (2025 b), called AQUAVis (Aquatic Virtual Constellation for Landsat -Sentinel 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 

Observations). Following NASA’s Harmonized Landsat -Sentinel product concept, AQUAVis is a 

globally validated processing framework designed to produce a harmonized Landsat 8/9 and 

Sentinel -2A/B reflectance dataset for aquatic remote sensing applications (Lima et al., 2025 b). The 

pipeline integrates atmospheric correction using the 6SV (Second Simulation of a Satellite Signal 

in the Solar Spectrum Vector) (Vermote, 1997 a) following t he approach proposed by Gordon and 

Wang (1994). Additional corrections were applied to mitigate glint and adjacency effects (Tanré 

et al., 1981; Vermote et al., 1997b). The framework also applies sensor -specific algorithms for 

OLI and MSI data, including r eprojection, spatial convolution resampling, gridding, and spectral 

bandpass adjustments derived from a globally representative spectral database of over 4,000 water 

bodies (Lima et al., 2025 a). Additionally, the pipeline generates a quality assurance (QA) band 

that includes cloud and shadow masks derived using the FMask algorithm (Zhu et al., 2015). The 

QA band also incorporates a water mask, created by thresholding a water -related spectral index in 

combination with the SWIR band. Details of each step are described by Lima et al. (2025 b). The 

result is a harmonized Landsat -Sentinel -2 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 in four spectral bands (blue 483 nm, green 560 nm, 

red 660 nm, and NIR 865 nm) , delivered at 30 -meter spatial resolution in the UTM projection 

using Military Grid Reference System (MGRS). In Lima et al. (2025b) AQUAVis 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 product is 

validated using 2,664 AERONET -OC matchup observations across 23 global sites, showing 

spectral differences ranging from 0.39% in the blue to 21% in the NIR, with media n biases near 

zero (≤0.0014 sr⁻¹) and interquartile ranges within ±0.002 sr⁻¹, indicating excellent radiometric 

consistency. Full radiometric assessment of the AQUAVis -derived 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 is beyond the scope of this 

study, and all details regarding its processi ng, accuracy, and reliability are documented in Lima et 

al. (2025b). While the original AQUAVis pipeline did not include SWIR bands in the 

harmonization process, we derived atmospherically corrected SWIR bands and incorporated them 

into the pipeline given its critical role in spectral index calculations . A total of 660 (from 2023 for 

training) and 18 6 (from 2024 for validation) 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 images were generated to deliver the algal bloom 

patch training and validation dataset s. The AQUAVis pipeline for the 847 images ran in the 

Mississippi Center for Supercomputing Research at the University of Mississippi using 50 x 2 -

Core Intel E5 2650. 12 

3.3. Generation of Landsat -Sentinel -2 algal bloom patch reference dataset s for training and 

validation 

We developed a semi -automatic algal bloom patch labeling approach to generate the first medium 

spatial resolution algal bloom patch reference dataset s, where 30 -meter pixel s were labeled as 

either (1) algal bloom or (0) backgroun d. The first step was masking invalid pixels , such as land 

and pixels affected by clouds, shadows, areas adjacent to clouds, and strong sunglint (Hu et al., 

2023 b). Cloud, shadow, and land pixels were masked using the QA band generated by the 

AQUAVis pipeline (Section 3.2), with an additional 30 -meter buffer applied to mask adjacent 

pixels. To minimize nearshore background interference, a 200 -meter buffer was appli ed from the 

shoreline into the water. Since AQUAVis water masks were generated using a SWIR -based 

threshold and included glint correction, no additional glint mask was applied. NDVI was computed 

as (R865 − R665)/(R865 + R665) to identify algal bloom candid ates (Yao et al., 2024), as the 

index has been successfully applied for algal bloom detection (Kahru et al., 1993; Ma et al., 2007; 

Oyama et al., 2015; Qin et al., 2022 ; Hu et al., 2023a ). To determine the index’s sensitivity to 

water reflectance changes a nd to identify the optimal threshold, we applied a series of NDVI 

values, ranging from -0.6 to 0.3 in 0.05 increments. The resulting masks were visually inspected 

to identify the threshold that best captured the observable bloom regions. To prevent the 

propagation of artifacts, we followed standard DL calibration practices by manually refining the 

initial labels (Wang & Hu , 2021; Hu et al., 2023). This step decouples the ground truth from the 

spectral index magnitude alone, ensuring that the labels remain independent of spectral index 

instability (Yao et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2025). Specifically, masks were refined using fa lse -color 

composites (Red, NIR, Green), where floating algae are clearly distinguished by their high NIR 

reflectance (Qi et al., 2020). Bloom -like features were identified based on m orphological cues, 

such as wispy, filamentous structures extending downstr eam. Not surprisingly, this is a complex 

task because algal blooms often exhibit a diffuse nature (i.e., dispersed unevenly over large areas) 

and lack clearly defined boundaries due to gradual transitions and patterns across the water surface. 

To address t his , misclassified regions were manually defined via coarse polygons, as illustrated by 

the green polygon in Figure 2, followed by the application of an unsupervised object detection 

method (Wang and Hu, 2015). This method involved Gaussian filtering to su ppress noise, followed 

by histogram equalization and a standard deviation -based threshold to enhance and segment the 13 

bloom region. The corrected pixels were then integrated into the original bloom mask. A final 

round of visual inspection ensure d the reliability and consistency of the labeled algal bloom areas. 

Figure 2 shows an example of the final mask alongside true -color, false -color, and original NDVI 

imagery .

A total of 24,265 patches, each with 30m 256 × 256 pixel s, were extracted from 2023 images for 

the algal bloom training dataset . Following the methodology proposed by Qi et al. (2025) and Yao 

et al. (2024), t he six input band variables are blue, green, red, and near -infrared (NIR) bands from 

the Landsat -Sentinel 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 product, along with NDVI and FAI. We conducted a sensitivity test 

(Appendix S2) to determine if omitting FAI and NDVI from the model inputs would yield 

comparable performance. As shown in Figure S10, NDVI and FAI support the distinction between 

floating algal blooms and water, and lead to better edge detection of algal blooms (Sun et al., 

2024). Within the deep learning framework, the spectral indexes are included as spatial contrast 

channels, i.e., two additional dimensions of the token embedding that enhance the spectral 

separability betw een bloom and water. Rather than providing absolute physical quantities, these 

indices contribute a sharpened edge -detection feature, and incorporating these indices as additional 

bands improves segmentation performance . Figure 3 illustrates representative examples of the 

extracted training patches. The number of patches per image was determined by multiplying the 

ratio of surface water to patch area by a factor of 1.5, ensuring comprehensive coverage of bloom 

structures. Patch centroids were randomly sampled from water pixels with a minimum 128 -pixel 

separation. This deliberate overlap provides i mplicit translational augmentation, forcing the model 

to learn position -independent features rather than location -specific artifacts (Martins et al., 2022). 

Each candidate patch was defined as a 256 × 256 -pixel box centered on a generated centroid and 

reta ined only if it included at least 10 algal bloom pixels . The training dataset was divided into 

85% training (20,572) and 15% validation (3,693) subsets ; note that this small validation set was 

only used to measure the training progress . The same methodology of patch extraction was applied 

to derive the validation dataset , but we used the independent 18 6 images from 202 4, resulting in 

12,255 validation patches. Histograms of b loom area proportions (Figure S2) demonstrate that the 

training and validation datasets are independently and representatively partitioned across all bloom 

sizes. 14 

Figure 3. Illustration of the patch extraction process used to construct the training and validation 

dataset. (A) shows 256×256 -pixel patches (magenta bounding boxes) sampled from the input 

ground -truth algal bloom mask (in green), following the spatial sampling str ategy described in 

Section 3.3. (B) highlight examples of extracted patches, with each pair consisting of a false -color 

composition (red, NIR, green) and its corresponding binary algal mask. Ground truth algal bloom 

mask is located in MGRS tile ID 21HVB (57.53°W, 34.78°S) on February 09, 2023. 

3. 4. Deep learning algorithms training for algal bloom pixel extraction 

We implemented and evaluated five deep learning models for image segmentation using CNN -

based and transformer -based architectures. Given the novelty of these models for the aquatic 

community, we provided a detailed description of their concept, structure, and configuration s. All 

models were trained with a 24,265 algal bloom patch reference dataset using an NVIDIA GPU 

A100 80GB card .

3. 4.1. ResUNet architecture with context encoding 

The U -Net architecture (Ronneberger et al., 2015) is the most widely adopted CNN -based model 

for segmentation in remote sensing tasks (Kim et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2023b; 

Wang and Hu, 2021 b; Feng et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2024 ). Based on the model developed by 

Diakogiannis et al. (2020), we propose d here the ResUNet with context encoding ( Figure 4). Its 

structure comprises an encoder for hierarchical feature extraction ( Figure 4, left side), a bottleneck 15 

for high -level semantic compression, and a decoder for spatial reconstruction (Figure 4, right side). 

The architecture is a lso enhanced by skip connections to fuse multi -scale features and residual 

layers to mitigate vanishing/exploding gradients (Xiao et al., 2018) . In the bottleneck (Figure 4, 

bottom), we incorporated dilated convolutions to capture wide -context features (Yu et al., 2015) 

and the Context Encoding Module to apply channel attention (Zhang et al., 2018). The final 

decoder block produces a 256×256 feature map used for algal bloom prediction. Details on model 

structure are described by Martins et al. (2022). 

During model training, key hyperparameters were tuned using Bayesian optimization (Brochu et 

al., 2010), resulting in a learning rate of 5e -5 and weight decay of 2e -4. AdamW optimizer was 

used with a cosine scheduler to gradually reduce the learning rate d uring training. Conventional 

image normalization was applied to normalize the input features using the global minimum and 

maximum, calculated per band. Basic data augmentations, including random rotations and flips, 

helped improve robustness. An early stop ping criterion based on validation loss was implemented 

to avoid overfitting (Liu et al., 2008). The model was trained using a composite loss function 

combining Dice loss, Cross Entropy Loss, and IoU loss to address class imbalance and improve 

boundary pre cision. Additionally, a distance -based weighting map derived from the ground truth 

mask was incorporated into the loss to emphasize object borders (Ronneberger et al., 2015). 16 

Figure 4. ResUNet architecture with context encoding used to segment 256 × 256 pixel patches 

for algal bloom mapping. The model employs 3×3 convolutional kernels and five encoder –decoder 

blocks that progressively increase the number of filters (up to 1024) while reducing spatial 

resolution. Residual connections (green arrows) facilitate gradient flow and stabilize training, 

while the decoder progressively upsamples and fuses encoder features to reconstruct spatial details. 

The number of feature maps is indicated above each box, and spatial dimensions are shown to the 

left of each block. 

3. 4.2. Pre -trained Vanilla Vision Transformer 

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have recently emerged as a powerful alternative to CNNs for dense 

prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation. In a ViT framework (Figure 5), the input image is 

divided into overlapping sub -patches, which are flattened and lin early projected into an embedding 

space, forming a sequence of tokens. These tokens are passed through stacked transformer blocks, 

where self -attention captures long -range contextual dependencies and builds global feature 

representations (Dosovitskiy et al ., 2021; Vaswani et al., 2017). For semantic segmentation, a 

decoder and segmentation head reconstruct the spatial structure to generate a pixel -wise 

classification map (Zheng et al., 2021). For ViT model training , the inputs were those labeled algal 

bloom features, together with the four 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 AQUAVis bands, NDVI , and FAI. Considering the size 

of our dataset, we initialized the model with pretrained ImageNet -1k weights (Russakovsky et al., 

2015) to enhance the model’s ability to capture spatial structures while reducing training demands 

(Rombado et al., 2024). Details on our architecture structure are provided in the supplemental 17 

material ( Appendix S1 ). Training was performed using AdamW optimizer with a learning rate and 

weight decay of 1e -4, guided by a cosine scheduler. Model optimization, input normalization, and 

augmenta tions followed the approach in Section 3.4.1. To improve training efficiency and stability 

using the pretrained weights, we first froze the encoder to train only the decoder, then unfroze it 

after several epochs with a lower learning rate to preserve pretr ained features while fine -tuning 

alongside the decoder (Lee et al., 2019). This gradual fine -tuning ensured stable convergence, as 

the pretrained weights are adjusted incrementally to the target task while maintaining their 

generalization capabilities (Lim a and Marfurt, 2020). 

Figure 5. ViT architecture adapted for the algal bloom task . The input patch is split into smaller 

non -overlapping spectral sub -patches and linearly projected into embeddings. These embeddings 

are processed through a stack of transformer encoder blocks. The resulting features are passed to 

a convolutional decoder, which upsamples and refines the prediction map. Colored arrows indicate 

key operations. The right panel illustrates the internal components of the Multi -Head -Self -

Attention mechanism, including the scaled dot -product attention. 

3. 4.3. Swin Transformer backbone combined with UperNet decoder 

To facilitate effective spatial learning without the computational cost of global self -attention, the 

Swin Transformer (ST) introduces a hierarchical ViT architecture with window -based multi -head 

self -attention (W -MSA) computed in fixed, non -overlapping windows (Figure S3) (Liu et al., 

2022). Unlike the standard ViT (Section 3.4.2) , which applies attention across the entire image, 

W-MSA restricts attention to local windows, substantially reducing computational complexity (Xu 

et al., 2021; He et al., 2022) . Details on the architecture design and layer configuration are provided 18 

in the Supplementary Material ( Figure S3 ). To optimize the ST model for our feature extraction 

task, we adopt the same strategy used for the Vanilla ViT (Section 3.4.2) and initialize it with 

ImageNet -pretrained weights. In the fine -tuning, the gradients in the first two backbone stages 

were frozen to mitigate gradient noise, improve model performance , and reduce training data needs 

(Parthasarath et al., 2024 ). To ensure a consistent co mparison, all training hyperparameters were 

the same as those used for the Vanilla ViT, including the optimizer configuration, learning rate 

schedule, loss function, and data augmentation and normalization strategy. This controlled setup 

ensures that any o bserved differences in performance can be attributed directly to architectural 

improvements rather than to variations in training conditions. 

3. 4.4. SegFormer 

The development of SegFormer models is based on the integration of Transformer -based learning 

with convolutional inductive biases (Xie et al., 2021) . Its architecture , illustrated in Figure S4, 

consists of two main components: the Mix Transformer (MiT) encoder and a lightweight decoder 

head. The MiT en coder adopts a hierarchical design similar to CNNs, where patch embedding and 

overlapping patch merging progressively reduce spatial resolution while enriching semantic 

abstraction (Yang et al., 2022). This structure allows the encoder to capture both loca l detail and 

global context efficiently. The decoder head fuses encoder outputs by projecting them into a 

common embedding dimension, producing a high -resolution semantic segmentation map. 

Additional details on the SegFormer architecture for algal bloom segmentation, including the layer 

configuration applied, are provided in the Supplemental Material (Figure S4). Following the 

Vanilla ViT (Section 3.4.2), we relied on pretrained weights load ed into the encoder to support 

more effective segmentation , while t he decoder head was initialized from scratch . All training 

hyperparameters, including the learning rate, optimizer, and learning rate scheduler, were kept 

consistent with the configurations used in the previous models. The loss function was also based 

on the same composite formulation, with the addition of a distance -based weighting map 

(originally introduced in the ResUNet model, Section 3.4.1) incorporated into the loss function. 

3.4. 5. Pr ithvi Foundational Model fine -tuning 

In recent years, Foundation Models (FMs) have emerged to address the challenge of limited 

labeled data in remote sensing (Xiao et al., 2024). Their development begins with a Self -19 

Supervised Learning (SSL) framework trained on a large unlabeled dataset to learn transferable 

and generalizable representations, allowing the model to adapt to new tasks with minimal fine -

tuning a nd no changes to the architecture (Choi et al., 2025). For instance, Prithvi, developed 

through a collaboration between IBM and NASA, was the first FM designed for Earth Observation, 

pre -trained on over 1 TB of Harmonized Landsat -Sentinel -2 (HLS) imagery u sing the Masked 

Autoencoder (MAE) architecture (Jakubik et al., 2023; Szwarcman et al., 2025) . MAE is a ViT -

based model designed to reconstruct original signals from partial observations ( He et al., 2021 ). 

During training, t he model divides the input image into non -overlapping patches, where a random 

subset of these tokens is masked, and the encoder learns to generate contextualized latent 

representations from the unmasked tokens by applying consecutive attention blocks . Once the 

encoder processes the input and masks the latent sequence, the decoder reconstructs the masked 

patches using the learned mask ed token s and the encoder’s output. The loss function compares the 

predicted pixel values of the masked regions with their ground -truth counterparts (Cong et al., 

2023) .

In our study, we used Prithvi V2 (600M) model (Szwarcman et al., 2025 ) as the backbone ViT 

encoder to generate attention maps (Figure S5) . To fine -tune the FM model to our downstream 

task, the encoder weight s were frozen (non -trainable) in the first 20 epochs to retain the 

generalization capabilities during training. Next, r ather than using the original MAE decoder for 

reconstruction, we inte grate d the decoder from the SegFormer model (Section 3.4. 4), which 

efficiently upsample d the multi -scale features extracted by the encoder layers . This hybrid 

architecture combines the self -supervised representations learned by Prithvi with the lightweight 

decoding capability of SegFormer, enabling pixel -level segmentation, even under limited 

supervision. The training was performed using the AdamW optimizer, a StepLR scheduler, and 

cross -entropy loss. Following the approach used in the ResUNet and SegFormer , we pre -computed 

the weight map for each ground truth mask , which was then combined into the loss function, to 

force the network to learn the small borders from algal blooms during backpropagation. 

3.5. Accuracy evaluation 

Model evaluation was performed using the 2024 independent validation dataset (12,255 patches; 

Section 3.3) by comparing predictions with ground -truth features at pixel -level and patch -level 20 

metrics. For each ground -truth patch, a 16 -pixel border was exclud ed to reduce susceptibility to 

prediction artifacts (Hu et al., 2023 b). At the pixel level, predictions were evaluated by computing 

the number of true positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN), and false negatives 

(FN ). From this, standard classification metrics were derived, including precision (precision =

TP /(TP + FP )), recall (recall = TP /(TP + FN )), and F1 -score (also known as the Dice 

coefficient) (F1 − score = (2 × precision × recall )/(precision + recall )). The F1 -score is 

defined as the harmonic mean of precision and recall, capturing both the accuracy of positive 

predictions (precision) and the model's sensitivity in detecting actual bloom pixels (recall) (Terven 

et al., 2025) . Additionally, omission and co mmission errors were calculated to assess model 

reliability (Foody, 2002) . Omission error quantifies the proportion of actual bloom pixels that were 

incorrectly predicted as non -bloom, highlighting under -segmentation or missed detections , and is 

calculated as omission = (FN /(TP + FN )) × 100 . W hile the commission error , calculated as 

𝑐 ommission = (FP /(TP + FP )) × 100 , measures the proportion of predicted bloom pixels that 

are non -bloom, indicating over -segmentation or false detections (Martins et al., 2022; Salleh, 

2023) . Patch -level validation metrics were also performed in terms of algal bloom area coverage 

within patches. This approach evaluates the influences of the proportion of bloom pixels relative 

to total patch size and allows assessment of the model’s ability to preserve bloom extent and spatial 

structure across regions. Because the ground -truth was not obtained from field measurements but 

generated from a semi -automatic approach, such metrics should be regarded as self -consistent (Hu 

et al., 2023 b). Finally, the impact of radiometric uncertainty on model performance was evaluated 

by introducing distinct levels of 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 noise derived from AQUAVis validation , with full 

methodological details described in Appendix S3. 

4. Results 

4.1. Benchmarking deep learning architectures for algal bloom segmentation 

Table 1 illustrates normalized confusion matrices for the algal bloom segmentation . Across all 

models, both true negative ( background correctly classified) and true positive ( algal bloom 

correctly classified) rates are generally high, reflecting robust performanc e in distinguishing bloom 

presence. Among them, SegFormer achieved the highest true positive rate (92.07%), 

demonstrating strong capability in detecting bloom regions. However, this came at the cost of a 

lower true negative rate (85.83%), indicating a high er tendency toward false bloom detections. 21 

The MAE (Prithvi) model exhibited the worst bloom classification performance, with a true 

positive rate of 66.63%, suggesting limited sensitivity and a tendency to miss portion s of bloom 

events . ResUNet and Swin T ransformer both showed well -balanced performance. ResUNet 

achieved a true negative rate of 90.27% and a true positive rate of 90.21%. Swin Transformer 

reached a true negative rate of 90.23% and a true positive rate of 87%, demonstrating reliable 

performanc e for both classes. 

Table 1. Per -class confusion matrices (in percentage) for algal bloom segmentation using five deep 

learning models: ResUNet, Vanilla ViT, Swin Transformer, SegFormer, and MAE (Prithvi). Each 

row shows the proportion of correctly and incorrectly classified pixels f or bloom and background 

classes, normalized independently per class to account for dataset imbalance. Best performance 

values for each metric are highlighted in bold. 

Model  True -Negative  False -Positive  False -Negative  True -Positive 

ResUnet  90.27  9.73  9.79  90.21 

Vanilla ViT  87.56  12.44  15.39  84.64 

Swin 

Transformer  90.23  9.77  13 .00  87 .00 

SegFormer  85.83  14.17  7.93  92.07 

MAE (Prithvi)  92.06  7.94  33.37  66.63 

Additional error metrics are shown in  Table 2, where a mong the ViT -based models, Swin 

Transformer delivered the best F1 -score (0.57), with also improved performance in terms of 

commission errors (57.51%) . SegFormer achieved the highest recall (0.92) but also the highest 

commission error (64.96%) and lowest precision (0.35), indicating a strong tendency to 

overpredict bloom pixels. MAE (Prithvi) showed the lowest recall (0.6 7) and highest omission 

error (33. 26%), reflecting poor sensitivity to bloom regions among the evaluated models. Vanilla 

ViT presented intermediate performances, with an F1 -score of 0.50 and a trade -off between 

omission and commission. For comparison, ResUNet achieved the highest precision (0. 43 ) and 

F1 -score (0.58). Despite the relatively high recall and precision values in Table 1, all F1 -scores 

(Dice coefficients) remained below 0.6 0, likely reflecting the fine -scale, fragmented spatial 

structure of algal blooms. In such conditions, even minor localization errors can greatly reduce 

overlap -based metrics like the Dice coefficient. Moreover, these results stem from out -of -

distribution inferences, where performance drops relative to in -distribution tests are common and 

well -documented. To fu rther assess whether the observed errors were due to true 

misclassifications, we included an additional analysis in Table S 1 by applying a one -pixel buffer 

around each ground truth mask to estimate a confidence interval for the reported metrics. This 22 

simpl e adjustment led to a marked improvement in performance across all models. From Table 

S1, the Swin Transformer showed the closest performance to ResUNet, with an F1 -score of 0.7 0,

and commission and omission errors of 25.28% and 28.39%, respectively. ResUN et, for instance, 

showed an improvement in the balance between omission ( 29.57 %) and commission ( 31.46 %) 

errors, leading to a F1 -score of 0. 70.

Table 2. Evaluation metrics for algal bloom segmentation using five deep learning models: 

ResUNet, Vanilla ViT, Swin Transformer, SegFormer, and MAE (Prithvi). Metrics include recall, 

precision, F1 -score (Dice coefficient), commission error (false positives), and omission error (false 

negatives) . Best performance values for eac h metric are highlighted in bold. 

Metrics  ResUNet  Vanilla 

ViT 

Swin 

Transformer  SegFormer  MAE 

Recall  0.90  0.84  0.8 7 0.92  0.6 7

Precision  0.43  0.3 6 0.42  0.35  0.41 

F1 -Score (Dice)  0.58  0.50  0.57  0.5 1 0.5 1 

> Commission (%)

56.59  64.05  57.51  64.96  59.00 

Omission (%)  9.88  15.52  13.12  7.99  33.26 

4.2. The impact of bloom -affected area on model performance errors 

Because algal blooms often appear as small, fragmented features, their coverage within a patch 

strongly affects detection and delineation.  Figure 6 ana lyzes omission and commission errors by 

bloom proportion, while  Figure 7 shows segmentation results across different bloom patterns. 

Following the app roach described in Section 4. 1, we recalculated the metrics presented in  Figure 

6 by incorporating a one -pixel confidence buffer around the ground truth labels. The resulting 

performance metrics are summarized in Table S2. From  Figure 6, omission error tends to dominate 

in patches with low bloom coverage, while commission error becomes more prominent as bloom 

coverage increases. For example, i n the lowest algal proportion (0 –0.1 %), all models exhibit high 

omission rates , ranging from 44.97 % ( Vanilla ViT ) to 64. 36 % ( ResUNet ), indicating some 

difficulty in detecting small , sparse , and fragmented bloom features. From Table S2, omission 

errors were notably reduced, ranging from 19.2 0% to 28.5 3%. Conversely, commission error 

re mains low in this range, typically below 5%, reflecting low false positive rates when bloom is 

nearly absent. 

As the bloom proportion increases , the models become more sensitive, reducing omission errors 

but at the cost of increasing commission errors. An exception to this trend is the MAE model, 

where omission errors remained high even under high bloom conditions . SegFormer show ed 23 

aggressive bloom detection in mid -to -high bloom bins ( > 45 %), with omission errors as low as 

16.3 4% but commission errors rising to 73. 56% (48.1 1%, Table S2) , suggesting a tendency toward 

over -segmentation. In contrast, both ResUNet and Swin Transformer exhibit relatively stable 

performance, maintaining a balance between omission and commission errors across a wide range 

of bloom proportions. The highest commission error for ResUNet was 62.4 3%, observed at bloom 

proportions above 85%, whereas the Swin Transformer reached a peak commission error of 

70.67 % in the same bloom proportion range. After applyin g a one -pixel confidence buffer around 

the ground truth labels, the maximum commission error was substantially reduced to 50.47 % for 

Swin Transformer. At moderate bloom proportions (25 –45%), ResUNet exhibited omission and 

commission errors of 27.35 % and 32 .35 %, respectively, while the Swin Transformer showed 

similar performance with omission and commission errors of 25.12 % and 33.16 % (Table S2). This 

improvement indicates that a considerable portion of the initial errors arose from minor spatial 

misalignmen ts, rather than actual misclassification of bloom areas. 24 

Figure 6. Sen sitivity analysis of each DL model's accuracy to the algal bloom area proportion. 

Results shown for six proportion groups composed of 12,255 256x256 30 -meter patches per group. 

Figure 7 shows segmentation examples for different algal bloom proportions within the patch ,

ranging from sparse to extensive bloom coverage . Each column corresponds to a different test 

patch, with the two top row s showing the true -color and false -color composite s and the subsequent 

rows displaying model predictions overlaid with ground truth . Green indicates correctly classified 

pixels (true po sitives), yellow represents commission error ( background classified as bloom), and 

red denotes omission error (bloom missed by the model). Overall, all models successfully 

identified algal bloom occurrence and demonstrated an ability to learn both dense an d subtle bloom 

patterns. In patches with low bloom coverage (first column), Swin Transformer, SegFormer , and 

ResUNet achieved higher proportions of correctly classified pixels, as also reflected in the bottom -

row bar plots. In contrast, MAE and Vanilla ViT struggled to detect subtle bloom structures, 

resulting in higher omission errors. As bloom proportion increases, all models show improved 

detection, but with a concurrent rise in commission error (yellow), particularly in Vanilla ViT and 

SegFormer, which tend ed to over -segment bloom regions. This pattern is most evident in the 

rightmost column, where SegFormer captures dense bloom areas but substantially overpredicts 

into surrounding non -bloom waters. Swin Transformer, on the other hand, maintained relativ ely 

low commission errors even at the highest algal bloom proportions. A closer examination of the 

spatial distribution of the predicted masks relative to the ground truth reveals that the majority of 

high commission errors observed in  Figure 6 and Table 2 stem primarily from the buffered nature 

of the predictions around the bloom boundaries, rather than from random or spatially inconsistent 

false positives. Additional examples in F igure S6 further illustrate these patterns across diverse 

spatial configurations of bloom events. 25 

Figure 7. Examples of algal bloom results for proposed models . The top two row s show the true 

and false color (red, NIR, green) composition s of the algal bloom occurrences, while the remaining 26 

rows illustrates the segmentation results and algal bloom reference masks together, showing 

correctly classified pixels (green), pixels that should have been classified as algal bloom but were 

not (red), and pixels that were incorrectly classified as blooms (yellow). The bar plots in the bottom 

row show the correct, omission , and commission proportions for each model. The location of each 

patch example is indicated by its MGRS tile ID, with corresponding tile centroids as follows :

19QFA ( 67.53°W, 18.49°N ), 18PZS ( 71.76°W, 10.34°N ), 40RDQ ( 56.54°E, 26.62°N ), 36MWE 

(33.49°E, 0.50°S ). 

4.3. Evaluating model performance under diverse environmental conditions 

Based on the previou s analysis, Swin Transformer demonstrated the best overall performance 

among the ViT -based evaluated models , and in this section, we examine its behavior under 

challenging real -world conditions. First, t o demonstrate the model mapping capability under 

verified events, we utilized a bloom occurrence dataset compiled by Gernez et al. (2023) and Qi 

et al. (2020, 2025) . As detailed in Table S3, 8 0 occurrences were cataloged between 2015 and 

2022 across coastal waters in 21 countries, spanning 27 species, 2 0 genera, and 5 classes, from 

which Swin Transformer accurately identified 52. Figure 8 illustrates representative detections 

across diverse coastal environments, years, morphologies, and taxa. These examples encompass 

eight different classes, including bo th micro - and macroalgae, and highlight how the model 

successfully capture d complex spatial structures such as filamentous streaks, patchy aggregations, 

and large -scale surface accumulations. Performance remained robust across optically complex 

environment s. For example, dense Microcystis blooms in Lagoa dos Patos are accurately mapped 

despite elevated turbidity and reduced water –bloom spectral contrast, conditions that typically 

confound threshold -based or index -driven approaches. Similarly, filamentous pa tterns observed in 

coastal and open -ocean settings (e.g., Baltic Sea and Arabian Sea cases) are well reproduced, 

indicating sensitivity to mesoscale and sub -mesoscale features. 27 

Figure 8. Qualitative evaluation of Swin Transformer segmentation across a wide range of real -

world algal bloom events. Each panel presents a paired visualization consisting of an RGB 

composite (left) and the corresponding model -derived bloom mask (right), where detected algal 

presence is shown i n white. The examples span multiple geographic regions, acquisition dates, 

water types, and bloom -forming taxa, highlighting the model’s ability to generalize across diverse 

environmental and optical conditions. 

Figure 9 provides a detailed visual assessment of Swin Transformer ’s segmentation performance 

across th e distinct OWTs described in Section 2.2 (Figure S1) . Classification maps from the other 

models are also provided for comparison in Figures S7 and S8 for each evaluated scenario. For 

OWT 1 (high chlorophyll a ), ST successfully captured the complex bloom structures, as evidenced 

by the strong spatial alignment with the ground truth and minimal omission or commission errors 

in the selected zoom regions. This indicates good sensitivity to dense bloom features typically 28 

associated with eutrophic waters . In OWT 2 (high TSS), while some linear bloom patterns were 

co rrectly detected, the highlighted areas showed some commission errors (yellow). However, it is 

important to highlight that the model did not misclassify high TSS regions as algal bloom, 

indicating good discrimination between sediment and bloom signals. For clear water s (OWT 3) ,

the model maintained strong performance, with accurate detection of faint bloom filaments and 

minimal misclassification. The subtle bloom structures present ed in th e ol igotrophic environment 

were well captured, demonstrating the mode l's capacity to generalize across low signal 

environments. As shown in Figure S7 , all ViT -based models were visually capable of identifying 

algal blooms across the different aquatic environments. Vanilla ViT and MAE, as expected, 

exhibited smoother predict ions and failed to capture finer algal filaments, particularly in scenes 

with complex spatial patterns. In contrast , SegFormer demonstrated strong performance, 

successfully detecting bloom features even in challenging turbid conditions. 29 

Figure 9. Segmentation examples for three OWTs using Swin Transformer . For each OWT, the 

true color composite (left) shows the full scene, followed by the ground truth mask and the ST 

prediction, with red circles marking selected regions of interest. These regions are highlighted in 

the circle images and include: false color image (red, NIR, green) , ground truth, ST output, and 

error overlay. Reflectance curves are also provided for ea ch OWT. The location of each example 

is indicated by its MGRS tile ID, with corresponding tile centroids as follows: 40REP ( 57.55°E, 

25.72°N ), 21HWB ( 56.40 °W, 34.83°S ), 40RDQ (56.54°E, 26.62°N). 30 

Figure 10  presents a visual evaluation of the Swin Transformer model’s performance under two 

atmospheric stress scenarios commonly encountered in coastal monitoring: (A) high -altitude cloud 

cover and ( B) intense glint interference. For each case,  Figure 10  shows the true -color composite, 

the corresponding ground truth mask, and the ST prediction. Cloud and shadow masks are plotted 

to highlight the cloud/shadow coverage masked by Fmask and the remaining interference that 

directly affect ed the model’s performance. In  Figure 10 A, despite substantial occlusion by thin 

clouds that were not masked by FMask, Swin Transformer effectively captured the main bloom 

structures with notable spatial coherence. The omission and commission error maps in the zoome d-

in regions reveal that, although the model exhibited buffered overprediction of bloom boundaries 

(as indicated by the yellow areas), the majority of bloom filaments were correctly segmented, 

demonstrating low sensitivity to thin cloud interference . In the second case ( Figure 10 B), strong 

glint introduce d spectral distortions that typically pose a significant challenge for optical remote 

sensing. How ever, the DL model effectively suppressed much of the glint -induced noise and 

successfully retrieved the bloom patches. The zoomed -in regions highlight this performance, 

showing minimal omission errors and no notable false positives attributable to glint. For both 

evaluated scenarios, the classification maps produced by ResUNet, ViT, MAE, and SegFormer are 

shown in Figure S 8. Among them , ResUNet exhibited the most precise delineation, closely 

matching the ground truth, followed by SegFormer. Consistent with previous analyses, Vanilla 

ViT and MAE showed smoother and more diffuse outputs. Despite these variations, none of the 

models appeared highly sensitive to thin clouds or glint artifacts, successfully delineating algal 

bloom features in their presence. 31 

Figure 10 . Performance of the Swin Transformer model under challenging atmospheric conditions: 

(A) is a case dominated by high -altitude clouds, and (B) is a case affected by strong glint + cloud .32 

For each scene, true -color composites, ground truth masks, and Swin Transformer predictions are 

presented. The cloud and shadow masks are also plotted. Insets below each case provide zoomed -

in visual comparisons between true -color imagery, ST predictions, and omission/commission 

outputs for selected regions of interest. Segmentation results for ResUNet, ViT, M AE, and 

SegFormer models are provided in Figure S 8. The location of each example is indicated by its 

MGRS tile ID, with corresponding tile centroids as follows: 19PBL (71.23°W, 9.44°N), 40RDP 

(56.55°E, 25.72°N). 

4.4. Beyond thresholds: evaluating traditional vs. deep learning approaches for algal bloom 

mapping 

To assess algal bloom mask quality under challenging imaging conditions, we compared the Swin 

Transformer model with traditional spectral index -based methods, fo cusing strictly on spatial 

delineation accuracy without discounting the fundamental value of indices as physically 

interpretable proxies. Figure 11 shows a four -day temporal evaluation of NDVI, FAI, and Swin 

Transformer performance. For the index -based met hods, a fixed threshold of zero was applied 

uniformly across all dates to reflect standard operational practice. While scene -by -scene threshold 

optimization might yield higher performance for individual images, such an approach is rarely 

feasible at large scales. Consequently, this comparison represents a realistic operational baseline 

rather than the theoretical maximum performance of each index; the qualitative results should be 

interpreted within this context. Visual inspection o n April 7 and 20 (Figure 11, A and B) indicates 

algal bloom occurrences in the true -color composites, where all methods successfully detected 

their presence , with NDVI and FAI produc ing some noisy responses in glint -affected areas. The 

contrast becomes more evident on April 22 and 27 (Figure 11, C and D), when no blooms are 

present but strong sun -glint dominates the scene. Here, NDVI and FAI falsely classified large 

glint -affected regions as blooms, highlighting their sensitivity to spectral distortions. In contrast, 

the Swin Transformer effectively distinguished glint artifacts from true bloom signals, avoiding 

false positives and demonstrating greater robustness under challenging optical conditions without 

the necessity of conserva tive masks. We also evaluated the sensitivity of FAI to different 

thresholds, and the examples in Figure S9 further demonstrate that FAI is highly sensitive to small 

threshold variations, with different dates exhibiting distinct “optimal” thresholds, under scoring the 

difficulty of developing an operational and scalable workflow for bloom segmentation using fixed 

index thresholds under varying glint, adjacency, and atmospheric conditions. 33 

Figure 11 . Temporal comparison of algal bloom detection using Swin Transformer, NDVI , and 

FAI across four consecutive cloud -free observations within the same month. Each column 

represents a different date, while rows correspond to: (1) true -color composites (top), (2) Swin 

Transformer predictions , (3) NDVI -based masks , and (4) FAI -based masks . Glint -affected regions 

are indicated with yellow arrows in the true -color images. Spectral index masks were generated 

using a threshold of 0. MGRS tile ID of the image scene i s 40RDP (56.55°E, 25.72°N). 

In the second scenario,  Figure 12  highlights the impact of spatial resolution on algal bloom 

detection by comparing the medium -resolution Swin Transformer predictions (30 meters) against 

coarser MODIS -derived daily bloom masks at 1 km resolution (Dai et al., 2023). While MODIS 

provides us eful large -scale information, its coarse spatial detail often fails to capture the fine -scale 

complexity of blooms, especially in nearshore regions that are commonly masked to avoid land 

pixels . The zoom -in areas in  Figure 12  illustrate how the ViT -based model delineates small bloom 

filaments and edges closely aligned with visible patterns in the true color imagery. In contrast, 

MODIS mask appears (red m ask in  Figure 12 ) fragmented and spatially generalized, missing 34 

smaller bloom patches and overestimating presence in uniform areas. Quantitatively, Swin 

Transformer predicted a bloom extent of 1,225.57 km², compared to 1,298 km² from MODIS. 

However, MODIS estimates should be interpreted only as a lower bound, since the “missing” 

positives from coarse resolution could represent more tha n 81% of the bloom area detected at 30 

m with AQUAVis. Despite the overall area extent , the finer spatial detail of AQUAVis provides 

more accurate delineation of bloom patterns, enabling the detection of subtle structures that are 

vital for early -warning s ystems, ecological assessments, and informed management decisions. 

Figure 12 . Comparison of algal bloom detection using medium -resolution Swin Transformer 

predictions (30 m, in white) and MODIS -derived daily bloom masks (1 km, in red) for a nearshore 

region (<50 km from the coast). The main panel displays the spatial distribution of both masks, 

while the insets (i –iii) highlight specific areas with correspo nding true color composites for visual 

reference. 

5. Discussion 

5.1. From pixels to patterns : Rethinking algal bloom mapping with deep learning and 

transformers 

Optical remote sensing provides broad spatial and temporal coverage for monitoring algal blooms, 

but variability in water constituents and atmospheric conditions challenges global model 35 

generalization, with most existing approaches remaining region -specific (Jeon, 2023 ; Hu et al., 

2023b , 2025 ). Here , we demonstrated a globally applicable algal bloom mapping by integrating 

multi -sensor satellite data with five deep learning architectures, including Vision Transformer s.

All evaluated models showed a strong ability to detect algal blooms in nearshore waters, with 

different levels of precision regarding minor details. Among ViT -based models, Swin Transformer 

showed the best delineation of local structures (F1 -score of 0.570 ), accurately capturing bloom 

extent in complex aquatic environments (Figure 7) . Validation against 2024 data and 2015 –2022 

occurrences demonstrates that the model’s spectral -spatial representations generalize across 

geographic regions, acquisition dates, water types, and bloom -forming taxa, highlighting the 

mo del’s ability to generalize across diverse environmental and optical conditions, and how the 

performance relies on bloom morphology and optical contrast rather than year -specific anomalies. 

Comparisons between CNN - and ViT -based models highlighted the role of architectural design .

ResUNet achieved the highest performance (F1 = 0.585) and maintained balanced omission and 

commission errors (29.57% and 31.46% , respectively ), effectively detecting blooms from 

fragmented patches to high -coverage events ( Figure 6). While CNN inductive biases help identify 

fine textures (Wang et al., 2019, 2021; Martins et al., 2022), they may struggle in unseen scenarios 

due to their limited receptive field (Hu et al., 2023a) . As detailed in section 3.4.2, ViTs improve 

generalization through global self -attention, which captures long -range dependencies by 

computing pairwise relationships across all spatial tokens, moving beyond the local receptive 

fields of traditional CNNs (Xu et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). However, this gl obal focus 

can lead to the over -smoothing of pixel -level boundaries, a common artifact in Vanilla ViT and 

MAE architectures (Figures 7, S7, S8). To improve pixel -level segmentation, Swin Transformer 

and SegFormer combine the global context modeling of self -attention with the spatial locality and 

efficiency of convolution (Xie et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021). Both models showed reduced omission 

and commission errors (Figure 6) and better captured fine -grained spatial details. Swin 

Transformer, for example, c aptures local context by applying self -attention within windows ,

focusing on spatially localized features (Figure S3) . Furthermore, due to architectural design, the 

models also differed in computational complexity. During training, ResUNet, with 29.1M 

para meters, achieved the fastest per -epoch time (1.7 min), followed by SegFormer (2.5 min with 

44.6M parameters) and Swin -T (3.3 min with 32.6M parameters). In terms of inference, Vanilla 36 

ViT (24M) and SegFormer were the most efficient, requiring 16s and 58s f or a full scene, while 

ResUNet required 15 min for full -scene inference, as convolutional encoder –decoder architectures 

scale less efficiently with large spatial inputs. Swin Transformer offered the best balance between 

accuracy and computational cost with an inference runtime of 4 min 28 s. The MAE (Prithvi) 

model, with 305M parameters, was by far the heaviest and exhibited the largest computational 

footprint during training and inference. 

5.2. Toward Scalable algal bloom mapping across diverse aquatic environments 

The model's performance was compared against algal bloom occurrences and evaluated under 

diverse atmospheric and environmental conditions . Across Optical Water Types (OWTs), Swin 

Transformer and other ViT -based models reliably delineat ed bloom structures, even in turbid or 

optically clear waters ( Figure 9). Similar behavior was observed under high thin cloud and glint 

conditions , where Swin Transformer consistently delineated bloom structures (Figure 10  and S8). 

While FMask filters out heavy cloud cover, residual thin clouds and glint can distort pixel spectra, 

also providing an ideal context to demonstrate the advantages of DL models over t raditional 

spectral index methods (Figure 1 1). For instance, Hu et al. (2023 b) applied a U -Net model to detect 

Sargassum in the Atlantic Ocean using MODIS imagery and compared its performance with the 

AFAI spectral index. Consistent with the results shown in Figure 1 1, they found that nearshore 

and cloud -adjacent pixels were frequently misclassified as Sargassum by the AFAI index , while 

the U-Net model successfully avoided these false positives, accurately identifying true algal 

features. As discussed in the Appendix S2 and highlighted in Figure 11 and S9 , despite the DL 

model being trained using spectral indices as input ch annels, while traditional indices -only rely on 

absolute pixel -wise thresholds, deep learning models prioritize the relational structure between 

spatial elements (Blondeau -Patissier et al., 2014; Ronneberger et al., 2015). This illustrates a key 

advantage o f DL approaches: by exploiting spectral –spatial context, they distinguish true bloom 

features from noise caused by atmospheric or surface effects, thereby reducing segmentation biases 

(Wang and Hu, 2016; Hu et al., 2019) and enhancing applicability across aquatic environments. 

Medium -resolution observations were also shown to provide substantial benefits (Wang and Hu, 

202 1a ). The results presented in Section 4.4 (Figure 1 2) demonstrated that our 30 -meter -resolution 

algal bloom map reveal ed a much finer spatial distribution of blooms completely obscured in the 

1-km MODIS -derived mask. This finding aligns with previous work by Wang and Hu (2021 b), 37 

who combined multiple high -resolution sensors to train a CNN for Sargassum detection. Their 

anal ysis showed that higher -resolution imagery consistently captured more Sargassum features, 

due to its ability to resolve small -scale structures missed by coarser sensors like MODIS. Although 

the signal -to -noise ratios of MSI and OLI are lower than those of dedicated ocean color sensors, 

both have proven effective for aquatic applications (Pahlevan et al., 2017 ). 

5. 3. Limitations and future work 

In our study, algal bloom distribution was characterized using various forms of representation, and 

a major challenge is quantifying uncertainties arising from limited in situ measurements for 

validating satellite -derived estimates (Hu et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023). As noted by Wang and Hu 

(2021b), even with high -resolution imagery, uncertainties persist, refle cting the difficulty of 

establishing an objective ground truth. We used a semi -automatic labeling approach combining 

visual inspection, spectral indices, and validated unsupervised detection methods (Wang and Hu, 

2015), a widely accepted alternative for DL performance assessment (Martins et al., 2022; Hu et 

al., 2023b ; Qi et al., 2025 ). Initial index -derived masks were extensively refined to create a final 

labeled masks that reflect visually identifiable bloom structures, independent of the absolute 

magnitu de of any red/NIR/SWIR -based ratio. Despite uncertaint ies , our DL models learn ed 

general spectral –spatial patterns (Rolnick et al., 2018) and effectively delineate d blooms across 

diverse environmental conditions, confirming that the curated dataset provide d a robust foundation 

for operational applications (Wang and Hu, 2021; Martins et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023; Yao et al., 

2024). Multi -sensor comparisons using co -located imagery can further evaluate uncertainties 

(Wang and Hu, 2021b). In our study, we com pared our classification with the algal bloom maps 

generated from MODIS (Dai et al., 2023), observing overall agreement, as illustrated in  Figure 12 .

Another limitation arises from how algal blooms are defined since a variety of floating algae have 

been detected through satellite remote sensing (Qi et al.,2023) , while other floating mater ials may 

also be mistaken for blooms (Mantas et al., 2011). This remains a recognized limitation, 

particularly with medium -resolution sensors that lack hyperspectral coverage. However, unlike 

semi -analytical approaches, DL models are data -driven, with the performance depending on the 

selection of representative training data. Future work may examine how these models handle 

additional floating materials. 38 

ViTs , when trained on large datasets, can outperform state -of -the -art CNNs in various tasks (Zheng 

et al., 2021 ). However, their data -hungry nature remains a limitation , addressed through large -

scale pre -training and task -specific fine -tuning (Thisanke et al., 2023 ). Here , this strategy was 

employed across all ViT -based models, where pre -training proved to be essential for making the 

training process computationally feasible in terms of both time and resource demands. However, 

the still -limited performance of the Prithvi pre -trained model (Figure 6, 7, S7, and S8) highlighted 

a major challenge in applying this approach to such domain -specific tasks: the limited availability 

of pre -trained models on domain -specific datasets. Here, the Vi Ts models were pre -trained on 

datasets different from aquatic environments in terms of spectral characteristics, spatial patterns, 

and optical complexity , limiting their effectiveness in such specialized applications. A key 

direction for future work is to include training datasets that encompass years characterized by 

anomalous bloom dynamics, which may produce bloom extents, intensities, and taxonomic 

compositions not well represented in the current dataset. Alongside this, the development of 

domain -aware foundational models trained on large -scale aquatic or ocean -specific datasets 

represents a compelling longer -term direction . Such models could integrate prior knowledge of 

water optics, seasonal dynamics, and sensor characteristics to improve performance and robustness 

in algal bloom detection across diverse aquatic systems. 

6. Conclusions 

The presented study offers a comprehensive benchmark for algal bloom segmentation in coastal 

waters, combining a globally labeled dataset, multi -sensor medium -resolution imagery, and state -

of -the -art deep learning architectures. By evaluating convolutional and transformer -based models, 

we outline practical labeling strategies and demonstrate the applicability of Vision Transformers 

for robust bloom mapping. Despi te challenges inherent to aquatic remote sensing, the models 

achieved strong detection accuracy and spatial delineation, with Swin Transformer excelling in 

fine -scale bloom identification and generalizable representation. These findings highlight deep 

lear ning sensitivity to intra -class variability and fragmentation, as well as the limitations of coarse 

sensors like MODIS. Beyond benchmarking, our framework advances scalable 30 -m algal bloom 

mapping using Landsat –Sentinel data, providing tools for near -real -time monitoring. To our 

knowledge, no systematic coastal bloom mapping pipeline at this resolution exists. Our 

contributions include: (i) a semi -automated workflow for curating a global dataset; (ii) insights 39 

into strengths and limitations of advanced DL models for aquatic applications; (iii) evidence of 

their utility for future operational systems; and (iv) groundwork for domain -aware foundational 

models that improve generalization across diverse environments. More broadly, this work 

illustrates how AI ca n overcome limitations of traditional feature extraction and, combined with 

expanding multi -sensor observations, offers a powerful pathway for advancing ocean science and 

ecosystem monitoring. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We thank the support of grant #80NSSC24K1040 aw arded by the NASA Early Career Investigator 

Program in Earth Science. We also thank NASA and ESA for providing access to Landsat -8/9 and 

Sentinel -2 A/B/C satellite data. 

References 

Anderson, D.M. Approaches to monitoring, control, and management of harmful algal blooms 

(HABs). Ocean Coast. Manage. 52, 342 –347, 2009. 

Anderson, D. M.; Cembella, A. D.; and Hallegraeff, G. M. Progress in understanding harmful algal 

blooms: paradigm shifts and new technologies for research, monitoring, and management. 

Annu . Rev. 4, 143 –176, 2012. 

Anderson, C.R.; Berdalet, E.; Kudela, R.M.; Cusack, C.K.; Silke, J.; O’Rourke, E.; Morell, J. 

Scaling up from regional case studies to a global harmful algal bloom observing system. 

Front. Mar. Sci. 250, 2019. 

Alawadi, F. Detection of surface algal blooms using the newly developed algorithm surface algal 

bloom index (SABI). Proc. Volume 7825, Remote Sens. of the Ocean., Sea Ice, and Large 

Water Regions, 2010.Alexander, L.M. The delimitation of maritime boundaries. Political 

Geo . Qua r., 1986. 

Alharbi, B. Remote sensing techniques for monitoring algal blooms in the area between Jeddah 

and Rabigh on the Red Sea coast. Remote Sen. Appl.: Society Environ. 30, 2023. 

Arellano -Verdejo, J.; Lazcano -Hernandez, H.E.; Cabanillas -Teran, N. ERISNe t: Deep neural 

network for Sargassum detection along the coastline of the Mexican Caribbean. PeerJ, 

Article e6842, 2019. 

Barton, A.D.; Irwin, A.J.; Finkel, Z.V.; Stock, C.A.; Anthropogenic climate change drives shift 

and shuffle in North Atlantic phytoplan kton communities. PNAS, v. 113, n.11, 2016. 

Blondeau -Patissier, D.; Gower, J.F.R.; Dekker, A.G.; Phinn, S.R.; Brando, V.E. A review of ocean 

color remote sensing methods and statistical techniques for the detection, mapping and 

analysis of phytoplankton bl ooms in coastal and open oceans. Progress in Oceanogr., v. 

123, p. 123 -144, 2014. 

Blondeau -Patissier, D., Brando, V.E., Lønborg, C., Leahy, S.M., Dekker, A.G. Phenology of 

trichodesmium spp. Blooms in the Great Barrier Reef lagoon, Australia, from the ESA -

MERIS 10 -year mission. PloS One 13, e0208010, 2018. 40 

Broschu, E.; Cora, V.M.; Freitas, N. A tutorial on Bayesian Optimization of expensive cost 

functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learning. 

Arxiv, 2010. 

Bulgare lli, B.; Zibordi, G. On the detectability of adjacency effects in ocean color remote sensing 

of mid -latitude coastal environments by SeaWiFS, MODIS -A, MERIS, OLCI, OLI and 

MSI. Remote Sens. of Environ., 2018. 

Caballero, I., Fernandez, R., Escalante, O.M., Maman, L., Navarro, G. New capabilities of 

sentinel -2A/B satellites combined with in situ data for monitoring small harmful algal 

blooms in complex coastal waters. Sci. Rep. 10, 8743, 2020. 

Caballero, I., Navarro, G. Monitoring cyanoHABs and water quality in Laguna Lake (Philippines) 

with Sentinel -2 satellites during the 2020 Pacific typhoon season. Sci. Tot. Environ. 788, 

2021. 

Cao, H.; Han, L.; Li, L. A deep learning method for cyanobacterial harmful algae blooms 

prediction in Taihu Lake, China. Harmful A lgae, 113, 102189, 2022 

Choi, Y.; et al. Defining Foundation Models for Computational Science: A Call for Clarity and 

Rigor. ArXiv, 2025. arXiv:2505.22904v2. 

Claverie, M.; Ju, J.; Masek, J.G.; Dungan, J.L.; Vermote, E.F.; Roger, J.C.; Skakun, S.V.; Justice ,

C. The harmonized Landsat and Sentinel -2 surface reflectance data set. Remote Sens. of 

Environ., 219, 145 -161, 2018. 

Colkesen, I.; Ozturk, M.Y.; Altuntas, O.Y. Comparative evaluation of performances of algae 

indices, pixel - and object -based machine learn ing algorithms in mapping floating algal 

blooms using Sentinel -2 imagery. Stoch Environ Res Risk Assess 38, 1613 –1634, 2024. 

Cong, Y.; et al. SatMAE: Pre -training Transformers for Temporal and Multi -Spectral Satellite 

Imagery. ArXviv, 2023. arXiv:2207.0805 1v3.Cui, T.W.; Laing, X.J.; Gong, J.L.; Tong, C.; 

Xiao, Y.F.; Liu, R.J.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, J. Assessing and refining the satellite -derived 

massive green macro -algal coverage in the Yellow Sea with high resolution images. ISPRS 

J. of Photogrammetry and Remo te Sens., v. 144, 2018. 

Dai, Y.; Yang, S.; Zhao, D.; Hu, C.; Xu, W.; Anderson, D.M.; Li, Y.; Song, X.P.; Boyce, D.G.; 

Gibson, L.; Zheng, C.; Feng, L. Coastal phytoplankton blooms expand and intensify in the 

21 st century. Nature, v. 615, 2023. 

Darecki, M.; Stramski, D. An evaluation of MODIS and SeaWiFS bio -optical algorithms in the 

Baltic Sea. Remote Sens. of Environ., 2004. 

Descloitres, J., Minghelli, A., Steinmetz, F., Chevalier, C., Chami, M., Berline, L. Revisited 

estimation of moderate resolution Sarga ssum fractional coverage using Decametric 

Satellite Data (S2 -MSI). Remote Sens. 13, 5106, 2021. 

Diakogiannis, F.I.; Waldner, F.; Caccetta, P.; Wu, C. ResUNet -a: A deep learning framework for 

semantic segmentation of remotely sensed data. ISPRS J. of Photog rammetry and Remote 

Sens., 162, 94 -114, 2020. 

Dierssen, H.M.; Kudela, R.M.; Ryan, J.P.; Zimmerman, R.C. Red and black tides: Quantitative 

analysis of water -leaving radiance and perceived color for phytoplankton, colored 

dissolved organic matter, and suspen ded sediments. Limnology and Oceanogr., v. 51, n. 6, 

p. 2485 -2854, 2006. 

Dolatabadi, F., Attaran -Fariman, G., Loghmani, M. Bloom occurrence and phylogeny of 

Gonyaulax polygramma (Dinophyceae) isolated from south east coast of Iran (Oman Sea). 

Iran. J. Fisheries Sci. 20, 1789 –1803, 2021. 41 

Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, 

M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., Uszkoreit, J., Houlsby, N., 2021a. An image is 

worth 16x16 words: transformers f or image recognition at scale. In: 9 th Int. Conference on 

Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3 -7, 2021. 

Drusch, M., et al. Sentinel -2: ESA's Optical High -Resolution Mission for GMES Operational 

Services. Remote Sens. of Enviro n., v. 120, p. 25 -36, 2012. 

Ershadifar, H., Koochaknejad, E., Ghazilou, A., Kor, K., Negarestan, H., Baskaleh, G. Response 

of phytoplankton assemblages to variations in environmental parameters in a subtropical 

bay (Chabahar Bay, Iran): harmful algal bloom s and coastal hypoxia. Reg. Stud. Mar. Sci. 

39, 2020, 

Feng, D., Zhang, Z., and Yan, K. A semantic segmentation method for remote sensing images 

based on the Swin Transformer fusion gabor filter. IEEE Access 10, 77432 –77451, 2022. 

Foody, G.M. Status of land cover classification accuracy assessment. Remote Sens. of Environ., 

v. 80, 2002. 

Gao, L.; Liu, H.; Yang, M.; Chen, L.; Wan, Y.; Xiao, Z.; Qian, Y. STransFuse: Fusing Swin 

Transformer and Convolutional Neural Network for Remote Sens. Image Semantic 

Segmenta tion. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 14, 2021. 

Gernez, P.; Zoffoli, M.L.; Lacour, T.; Farinas, T.H.; Navarro, G.; Caballero, I.; Harmel, T. The 

many shades of red tides: Sentinel -2 optical types of highly -concentrated harmful algal 

blooms. Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 287, 113486, 2023. 

Gobler, C. J. Climate change and harmful algal blooms: insights and perspective. Harmful Algae 

91, 101731, 2020. 

Gordon , H.R.; Wang, M. Retrieval of water -leaving radiance and aerosol optical thickness over 

the oceans with SeaWiFS: a preliminary algorithm. Appl. Optics, v. 33, n. 3, 1994. 

Gower, J., King, S., Goncalves, P. Global monitoring of plankton blooms using MERIS MCI. Int. 

J. Remote Sens. 29, 6209 –6216, 2008. 

Gower, J., & King, S. Distribution of float ing Sargassum in the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic 

Ocean. mapped using MERIS. Int. J. of Remote Sens., 32, 1917 –1929, 2011. 

Gower, J., Young, E., & King, S. Satellite images suggest a new Sargassum source region in 2011. 

Remote Sens. Lett., 4,764 –773, 20 13. 

Hallegraeff, G. M. et al. Perceived global increase in algal blooms is attributable to intensified 

monitoring and emerging bloom impacts. Commun. Earth Environ. 2, 117, 2021. 

He, K.; et al. Masked Autoencoder are scalable vision learners. arXiv, 2021. 

He, X.; Zhou, Y.; Zhao, J.; Zhang, D.; Yao, R.; Xue, Y. Swin Transformer Embedding UNet for 

Remote Sens. Image Semantic Segmentation. IEEE Trans. on Geosci. and Remote Sens., 

v. 60, 2022 

Hordiiuk, D.; Oliinyk, I.; Hnatushenko, V.; Maksymov, K. Semantic Seg mentation for Ships 

Detection from Satellite Imagery, 2019 IEEE 39th Int. Conference on Electronics and 

Nanotechnology (ELNANO), pp. 454 -457, 2019. 

Hu, C. A novel ocean color index to detect floating algae in the global oceans. Remote Sens. 

Environ. 113, 2 118 –2129, 2009. 

Hu, C.; et al. Sargassum coverage in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico during 2010 from Landsat 

and airborne observations: Implications for the Deepwater Horizon oil spill impact 

assessment. Mar. Pollution Bull., v. 107, 2016. 

Hu, L.; Zeng, K.; Hu, C.; He, M.X. On the remote estimation of Ulva prolifera areal coverage and 

biomass. Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 223, 2019. 42 

Hu, C., Qi, L., Hu, L., et al. Mapping Ulva prolifera green tides from space: a revisit on algorithm 

design an d data products. Int. J. Appl.Earth Observ.Geoinform. 116, 103173, 2023a. 

Hu, C.; Zhang, S.; Barnes, B.B.; Xie, Y.; Wang, M.; Cannizzaro, J.P.; English, D.C. Mapping and 

quantifying pelagic Sargassum in the Atlantic Ocean. using multi -band medium -resolutio n

satellite data and deep learning. Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 289, 2023b. 

Hu, C.; Barnes, B.B.; Qi, L.; Gower, J.F.R.; Jiao, J.; Xie, Y. Monitoring pelagic Sargassum in the 

Atlantic Ocean. from space: Principles and practices. Harmful Algae, v. 114, 202 5. 

IOCCG. Observation of harmful algal blooms with ocean colour radiometry. In: Bernard, S., 

Kudela, R., Robertson Lain, L., Pitcher, G.C. (Eds.), IOCCG Report Series, No. 20. Int. 

Ocean. Colour Coordinating Group, Dartmouth, Canada, 2021. 

Jakubik, J.; et al. Foundation Models for Generalist Geospatial Artificial Intelligence. arXiv, 2023. 

Jeon, G. Advanced Machine Learning and Deep Learning Approaches for Remote Sens.. Remote 

Sens. – Special Issue Reprint, 2023. 

Ju, J.; et al. The Harmonized Landsat and Se ntinel -2 version 2.0 surface reflectance dataset. 

Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 324, 2025. 

Kabir, S.; Pahlevan, N.; O’Shea, R.E.; Barnes, B.B. Leveraging Landsat -8/9 underfly observations 

to evaluate consistency in reflectance products over aquatic environm ents. Remote Sens. 

of Environments, v. 296, 2023. 

Kahru, M.; Leppanen, J.M.; Rud, O. Cyanobacterial blooms cause heating of the sea surface. 

Marine Ecology Progress Series, v. 101, 1993. 

Kahru, M., Anderson, C., Barton, A.D., Carter, M.L., Catlett, D., Sen d, U., Mitchell, B.G. Satellite 

detection of dinoflagellate blooms off California by UV reflectance ratios. Elem. Sci. Anth. 

9, 2021. 

Karlson, B., Andersen, P., Arneborg, L., Cembella, A., Eikrem, W., John, U., Suikkanen, S. 

Harmful algal blooms and their effects in coastal seas of northern Europe.  Harmful Algae 

102, 101989, 2021. 

Kislik, C.; Dronova, I.; Grantham, T.E.; Kelly, M. Mappin g algal bloom dynamics in small 

reservoirs using Sentinel -2 imagery in Google Earth Engine. Ecological Indicators, v. 140, 

2022. 

Kruse, F.A.; Lefkoff, A.B.; Boardman, J.W.; Heidebrecht, K.B.; Shapiro, A.T.; Barloon, P.J.; 

Goetz, A.F.H.; The spectral image processing system (SIPS) – interactive visualization and 

analysis of imaging spectrometer data. Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 44, 1993. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0034 -4257(93)90013 -N

Kutser, T. Passive optical remote sensing of cyanobacteria and other intense phytoplankton blooms 

in coastal and inland waters. Int. J. of Remote Sens., v. 30, n. 17, p. 4401 -4425, 2009. 

Laval, M.; Belmouhcine, A.; Courtrai, L.; Descloitres, J.; Salazar -Garibay, A.; Schamberger, L.; 

Minghelli, A.; Thibaut, T.; Dorville, R.; Mazoye r, C.; et al. Detection of Sargassum from 

Sentinel Satellite Sensors Using Deep Learning Approach. Remote Sens., 2023. 

Lee, J.; Tang, R.; Lin, J. What Would Elsa Do? Freezing Layers During Transformer Fine -Tuning. 

ArXiv, 2019. arXiv:1911.03090v1. 

Li, J.; R oy, D.P. A Global Analysis of Sentinel -2A, Sentinel -2B and Landsat -8 Data Revisit 

Intervals and Implications for Terrestrial Monitoring. Remote Sens., 2017. 

Li, X.; Liu, B.; et al. Deep -learning -based information mining from ocean remote -sensing imagery. 

National Sci. review, v. 1, 1584 -1605, 2020. 43 

Lima, T.M.A.d.; Martins, V.S.; Paulino, R.S.; Caballero, C.; Maciel, D.A.; Giardino, C. A general 

spectral bandpass adjustment function (SBAF) for harmonizing Landsat -Sentinel over 

inland and coastal waters. of Remote Sens., 2025a. 

Lima, T.M.A.d.; Martins, V.S.; Paulino, R.S.; Caballero, C.; Ashapure, A. AQUAVis: Landsat -

Sentinel Virtual Constellation of Remote Sens. Reflectance (Rrs) Product for Coast. and 

Inland Waters. Sci. of Remote Sens., 2025b. 

Liu, Y., Starzyk, J.A., Zhu, Z. Optimized approximation algorithm in neural networks without 

overfitting. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 19 (6), 983 –995, 2008. 

Liu, Z.; Lin, Y.; et al. Swin Transformer: Hierachical Vision Transformer using Shifted Windows, 

arXiv , 2021. 

Loveland, T.R.; Irons, J.R. Landsat 8: The plans, the reality, and the legacy. Remote Sens. of 

Environ., v. 185, p.1 -6, 2016. 

Lu, S.; et al. Vision Foundation Models in Remote Sens.: A Survey. ArXiv, 2025. 

Lv, J.; Shen, Q.; Lv, M.; Li, Y.; Shi, L.; Zhang, P. Deep learning -based semantic segmentation of 

remote sensing images: a review. Frontier in Ecology and Evolution, 2023. 

Ma, M.; Wang, X.; Veroustraetes, F.; Dong, L. Change in area of Ebinur Lake during the 1998 -

2005 period. International Journal of Remote Sensing, v. 28, n. 24, 2007. 

Ma, L.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, X.; Ye, Y.; Yin, G.; Johnson, B.A. Deep learning in remote sensing 

applications: a meta -analysis and review. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., 152, pp. 

166 -177, 2019. 

Ma, J., Jin, S., Li, J., He, Y., Shang, W. Spatio -temporal variations and driving forces of harmful 

algal blooms in Chaohu Lake: a multi -source remote sensing approach. Remote Sens. 13, 

427, 2021. 

Maggiori, E.; Tarabalka, Y.; Charpiat, G.; Alliez, P. Convolutional Neural Networks for Large -

Scale Remote -Sensing Image Classification. IEEE Trans. on Geosci. and Remote Sens., v. 

55, n. 2., 2017. 

Mantas, V.M.; Pereira, A.J.S.C.; Morais, P.V. Plumes of discolored water of volcanic origin and 

possible implications for algal communities. The case of the Home Reef eruption of 2006 

(Tonga, Southwest Pacific Ocean .). Remote Sens. Environ. 115, 2011. 

Martins, V.S.; Roy, D.P.; Huang, H.; Bochetti, L.; Zhang, H.K.; Yan, L. Deep learning high 

resolution burned area mapping by transfer learning fr om Landsat -8 to PlanetScope. 

Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 280, 113203, 2022. 

Masek, J.G.; Wulder, M.A.; Markham, B.; McCorkel, J.; Crawford, C.J.; Storey, J.; Jenstrom, D.T. 

Landsat 9: empowering open science and applications through continuity. Remote Sen s. of 

Environ., v. 248, 2020. 

Mishra, S.; Mishra, D.R. Normalized difference chlorophyll index: A novel model for remote 

estimation of chlorophyll -a concentration in turbid productive waters. Remote Sens. of 

Environ., v. 117, 2012. 

Morel, A.; Belanger, S. Improved detection of turbid waters from ocean color sensors information. 

Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 102, 2006. 

Odermatt, D.; Gitelson, A.; Brando, V.E.; Rev. of constituent retrieval in optically deep and 

complex waters from satellite imagery. Remote Se ns. Environ., vol. 118, pp. 116 –126, 

2012. 

Ody, A.; et al. From In Situ to satellite observations of pelagic Sargassum distribution and 

aggregation in the Tropical North Atlantic Ocean.. PLoS ONE 14(9), 2019. 44 

Oyama, Y.; Matsuhita, B.; Fukushima, T. Disting uishing surface cyanobacterial blooms and 

aquatic macrophytes using Landsat/TM and ETM+ shortwave infrared bands. Remote 

Sensing of Environment, v. 157, p. 35 -47, 2015. 

Page, B.P.; Olmanson, L.G.; Mishra, D.R. A harmonized image processing workflow using 

Se ntinel -2/MSI and Landsat -8/OLI for mapping water clarity in optically variable lake 

systems. Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 231, 111284, 2019. 

Pahlevan, N.; Sarkar, S.; Franz, B.A.; Balasubramanian S.V.; He, J. Sentinel -2 MultiSpectral 

Instrument (MSI) data processing for aquatic science applications: Demonstrations and 

validation. Remote Sens. of Environ.. 2017. 

Pahlevan, N.; Chittimalli, S.K.; Balasubramanian, S.V.; Vellucci, V. Sentinel -2/Landsat -8 product 

consistency and implications for monitoring aquati c systems. Remote Sens. of Environ., 

220, 19 -29, 2019. 

Pahlevan, N.; et al. A Retrospective Analysis of Remote -Sensing Reflectance Products in Coast. 

and Inland Waters. IEEE Geosci. and Remote Sens. Lett., v. 21, 2024. 

Parthasarath, V.B.; Zafar, A.; Khan, A.; Shahid, A. The Ultimate Guide to Fine -Tuning LLMs 

from Basics to Breakthroughs: An Exhaustive Rev. of Technologies, Res., Best Practices, 

Appl. Res. Challenges and Opportunities. ArXiv, 2024. arXiv:2408.13296v1. 

Qi, L., Tsai, S.F., Chen, Y., Le, C., Hu, C. In search of red Noctiluca scintillans blooms in the 

East China Sea. Geophys. Res. Lett. 46, 5997 –6004, 2019. 

Qi, L.; Hu, C.; Mikelsons, K.; Wang, M.; Lance, V.; Sun, S.; Barnes, B.B.; Zhao, J.; Zande, D.V. 

In search of floating algae and other org anisms in global oceans and lakes. Remote Sens. 

of Environ., v. 239, 111659, 2020. 

Qi, L., Hu, C. To what extent can Ulva and Sargassum be detected and separated in satellite 

imagery? Harmful Algae 103, 102001, 2021. 

Qi, L.; Wang, M.; Hu, C. Uncertainties in MODIS -Derived Ulva Prolifera Amounts in the Yellow 

Sea: A Systematic Evaluation Using Sentinel -2/MSI Observation. IEEE Geosci. and 

Remote Sens. Lett., v. 20, 2023 .

Qi, L.; Wang, M.; Barnes, B.B.; Capone, D.G.; Goes, J. I.; Carpenter, E.J.; Xie, Y.; Hu, C. Global 

floating algae blooms are expanding. Nature Communications, v.17, 2025. 

Qin, X.; Hu, X.; Shao, Z. Dynamic variations of cyanobacterial blooms and their response to urban 

development and climate change in Lake Chaohu based on Landsat observations. 

Environmental Science and Pollution Research, v. 29, p. 22152 -22166, 2022. 

Rombado, L.; Orescanin, M.; Orescanin, M.M. Uncertainty -Aware Aerial Coast. Imagery Pattern 

Recognition Through Transfer Learning with ImageNet -1K Variational Embeddings. 

IEEE Geos ci. and Remote Sens. Society Section, 2024. 

Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T. U -net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image 

segmentation. In: Navab, N., Hornegger, J., Wells, W.M., Frangi, A.F. (Eds.), Medical 

Image Computing and Computer -Assiste d Intervention. Springer, Munich, Germany, pp. 

234 –241, 2015. 

Rolnick, D.; Veit, A.; Belongie, S.; Shavit, N. Deep Learning is Robust to Massive Label Noise. 

ArxViv, 2018. arXiv:1705.10694 

Roux, P., Siano, R., Souchu, P., Collin, K., Schmitt, A., Manach, S ., Schapira, M. Spatio -temporal 

dynamics and biogeochemical properties of green seawater discolorations caused by the 

marine dinoflagellate Lepidodinium chlorophorum along southern Brittany coast. Estuar. 

Coast. Shelf Sci. 107950, 2022. 45 

Roy, D.P.; et al. L andsat -8: Sci. and product vision for terrestrial global change research. Remote 

Sens. of Environ., v. 145, 2014. 

Russakovsky, O.; et al. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. Int. J. of Computer 

Vision, v. 115, p. 211 -252, 2015. 

Salleh, H.M. Errors of commission and omission in artificial intelligence: contextual biases and 

the voids of ChatGPT as a research assistant. Digital Economy and Sustainable 

Development, v. 1, 2023. 

Smith, V. H. Eutrophication of freshwater and coastal marine ecosyst ems a global problem. 

Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 10, 126 –139, 2003. 

Smith, M.E., Bernard, S. Satellite Ocean color -based harmful algal bloom indicators for 

aquaculture decision support in the southern Benguela. Front. Mar. Sci. 61, 2020. 

Spyrakos, E.; et a l. Optical types of inland and coastal waters. Limnology and Oceanogr., v. 00, 

2017. 

Sun, Y.; Wang, M.; Liu, M.; Li, Z.B.; Chen, Z.; Huang, B. Continuous Sargassum monitoring 

across the Caribbean Sea and Central Atlantic using multi -sensor satellite observ ations. 

Remote Sensing of Environment, v. 309, 2024. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2024.114223 

Szwarcman, D.; et al. Prithvi -EO -2.0: A Versatile Multi -Temporal Foundation Model for Earth 

Observation Applications. ArXiv, 2024. 

Tanré, D., Herman, M., Descham ps, P.Y., De Leffe, A. Atmospheric modeling for space 

measurements of ground reflectances, including bidirectional properties. Appl. Optics, v. 

18 (21), 3587 –3594, 1979. 

Terven, J.; et al. A comprehensive survey of loss functions and metrics in deep learning. Artificial 

Intelligence Rev., v.58 (195), 2025. 

Thisanke, H.; et al. Semantic segmentation using Vision Transformers: A survey. Engineering 

Applications of Artificial Intelligence, v. 126, 2023. 

Tomlinson, M.C., Wynne, T.T., Stumpf, R.P. An evaluation of remote sensing techniques for 

enhanced detection of the toxic dinoflagellate, Karenia brevis.  Remote Sens. Environ. 113, 

598 –609, 2009. 

Tran, M. D., Vantrepotte, V., Loisel, H., Oliveira, E. N., T ran, K. T., Jorge, D., Paranhos, R., et al. 

Band ratios combination for estimating chlorophyll -a from sentinel -2 and sentinel -3 in 

coastal waters. Remote Sens., 15(6), 1653, 2023. 

Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; et al. Attention is all you need. arXiv, 2017. 

Ver mote, E.; Tanré, D.; Deuzé, J.L.; Herman, M.; Morcrette, J.J.; Kotchenova, S.Y. Second 

Simulation of a Satellite Signal in the Solar Spectrum, 6S: An overview. IEEE Trans. 

Geosci. Remote Sens., 35, 675 -686, 1997a. 

Vermote, E.F., El Saleous, N., Justice, C. O., Kaufman, Y.J., Privette, J.L., Remer, L., Roger, J.C., 

Tanré, D. Atmospheric correction of visible to middle -infrared EOS -MODIS data over land 

surfaces: background, operational algorithm, and validation. J. Geophys. Res. 102, 17131, 

1997b. 

Zahir, M.; S u, Y.; Shahzad, M.I.; Ayub, G.; Rahman, S.U.; Ijaz, J. A review on monitoring, 

forecasting, and early warning of harmful algal blooms. Aquaculture, v. 593, 741351, 2024. 

Zhang, H., Dana, K., Shi, J., Zhang, Z., Wang, X., Tyagi, A., & Agrawal, A. Context En coding 

for Semantic Segmentation . IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 

Recognition (CVPR), 2018. 

Zhang, C.; Wang, L.; Cheng, S.; Li, Y. SwinSUNet: Pure Transformer Network for Remote Sens. 

Image Change Detection. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Se ns., 2022. 46 

Zhang, S., Hu, C., Barnes, B.B., Harrison, T.N. Monitoring Sargassum inundation on beaches and 

nearshore waters using PlanetScope/Dove observations. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 

19, 1503605, 2022. 

Zhou, Q.; et al. Towards Seamless Global 30 -m Terrestrial Monitoring: Evaluating 2022 Cloud 

Free Coverage of Harmonized Landsat and Sentinel -2 (HLS) V2.0. IEEE Geosci. and 

Remote Sens. Lett., v. 22, 2025. 

Zheng, S. et al. Rethinking Semantic Segmentation from a Sequence -to -Sequence Perspective with 

Transformers. Proc. of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 

Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6881 -6890, 2021. 

Zhu, Z., Wang, S., Woodcock, C.E. Improvement and expansion of the Fmask algorithm: cloud, 

cloud shadow, and snow detection for Landsats 4 -7, 8, and Sentinel 2 images. Remote 

Sens. Environ., 2015. 

Xiao, X., Lian, S., Luo, Z., Li, S., 2018. Weighted Res -UNet for high -quality retina vessel 

segmentation. In: 2018 9th Int. Conference on Information Technol. in Medicine and 

Education (ITME), pp. 327 –331, 2018. 

Xiao, A.; Xuan, W.; Wang, J.; Huang, J.; Tao, D.; Lu, S.; Yokoya, N. Foundation Models for 

Remote Sens. and Earth Observation: A Survey. ArXvi, arXiv:2410.16602v2, 2024. 

Xie, E.; Wang, W.; Yu, Z.; Anankumar, A.; Alvarez, J.M.; Luo, P. SegFor mer: Simple and 

Efficient Design for Semantic Segmentation with Transformers, arXiv, 2021. 

Xu, Z., Zhang, W., Zhang, T., Yang, Z., Li, J. Efficient transformer for remote sensing image 

segmentation. Remote Sens., 13, 2021. 

Xu, M.; Barnes, B.B.; Hu, C.; Carl son, P.R.; Yarbro, L.A. Water clarity monitoring in complex 

coastal environments: Leveraging seagrass light requirement toward more functional 

satellite ocean color algorithms. Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 256, 2023. 

Wang, M.; Hu, C. Extracting oil slick f eatures from VIIRS Nighttime imagery using a Gaussian 

filter and morphological constraints. IEEE Geosci. and Remote Sens. Lett., v.12, n.10, 

2015. 

Wang, M.; Hu, C. Mapping and quantifying Sargassum distribution and coverage in the Central 

West Atlantic usi ng MODIS observations. Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 183, p. 350 -367, 

2016. 

Wang, S.; Liu, L.; Qu, L.; Yu, C.; Sun, Y.; Gao, F.; Dong, J. Accurate Ulva prolifera regions 

extraction of UAV images with superpixel and CNNs for ocean environment monitoring. 

Neu rocomputing, 348, pp. 158 -168, 2019. 

Wang, X.; Xing, Q.; An, D.; Meng, L.; Zheng, X.; Jiang, B.; Liu, H. Effects of Spatial Resolution 

on the Satellite Observation of Floating Macroalgae Blooms. Water, v. 13, 2021. 

Wang, M.; Hu, C. Automatic Extraction of Sargassum Features from Sentinel -2 MSI Images. IEEE 

Trans. on Geosci. and Remote Sens., v. 59, 2021a. 

Wang, M.; Hu, C. Satellite remote sensing of pelagic Sargassum macroalgae: The power of high 

resolution and deep learning. Remote Sens. of Environ., 264, 112631, 2021b. 

Wulder, M.A.; et al. Fifty years of Landsat science and impacts. Remote Sens. of Environ., v. 280, 

2022. 

Wang, H.; et al. WaterCycleDiffusion: Visual -textual fusion empowered underwater image 

enhancement. Information Fusion, v. 127, 2026. 

Weisberg, R.H.; Liu, Y.; Lembke, C.; Hu, C.; Hubbard, K.; Garrett, M. The Coastal Ocean 

Circulation Influence on the 2018 West Florida Shelf K. brevis Red Tide Bloom. JGR 

Oceans, v. 124, 2019. 47 

Yang, L.; Wang, X.; Zhai, J. Waterline Extraction for Artificia l Coast with Vision 

Transformers. Front. Environ. Sci. , 10 , 799250, 2022. 

Yao, Y.; Hu, C.; Cannizzaro, J.P.; Zhang, S.; Barnes, B.B.; Xie, Y.; Qi, L.; Armstrong, C.; Chen, 

Z. Detecting cyanobacterial blooms in the Caloosahatchee River and Estuary using 

Pla netScop imagery and deep learning. IEEE Trans. on Geosci. and Remote Sens., v. 62, 

2024. 

Yu, F.; Koltun, V. Multi -Scale Context Aggregation by Dilated Convolutions. ArXiv, 2015. S1

# Supplementa ry Material 

> Tables and Captions

Figure S1 – (A) Mean Rrs spectra for each selected OLI/MSI image in the validation 

dataset , classified into the three defined Optical Water Types (OWTs). The black solid 

line represents the reference Rrs spectrum used in the Spectral Angle Mapper (SAM) 

classifier. (B) Geographical distribution of the selected images for validation and the 

numbe r of algal bloom occurrences identified at each location. 

Figure S2 - Frequency distributions of the algal bloom area proportion (expressed as a 

percentage of the 256 × 256 30 m pixel patch) of the 24,265 training patches and the 

12,255 validation patche s. S2

Figure S 3. Architecture of the Swin Transformer model. The input image, resized to 

224×224, is initially partitioned into non -overlapping 4×4 patches, each projected to a 

96 -dimensional token. The encoder comprises four hierarchical stages ([2, 2, 6, 2] ST 

blocks , green boxes ), each integrating layer normalization, W -MSA, and MLP layers to 

produce four resolution outputs. Self -attention is computed locally within 7×7 windows 

using MHSA, with a subsequent half -window shift to capture global context ( SW -MSA). 

Unlike Vanilla ViTs, spatial resolution decreases across stages through Patch Merging, 

which groups 2×2 adjacent patches, concatenates their embeddings, and applies a linear 

projection to increase channel dimensionality (Lin et al., 2022). The out put of the ST 

backbone encoder (left side) consists of multi -layer feature maps from each stage, which 

were fused using a UPerNet -style decoder (Xiao et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2021), 

beginning with a 1×1 convolution (blue arrows) to align channel dimensi ons across 

stages. Next, the decoder progressively upsample feature maps (pink arrows) from deeper 

layers and fuses them with higher -resolution features. Each fused feature map is also 

passed through a 3x3 convolution to refine local details and suppress a rtifacts introduced 

by upsampling. All scaled -adjusted feature maps are concatenated along the channel 

dimension and passed through a fusion head; a sequence of convolutional layers designed 

to aggregate the multi -scale context into a dense prediction map. The output is then 

upsampled to match the spatial resolution of the original input image, producing the final 

segmentation logits. S3

Figure S 4. Architecture of the SegFormer model. Each stage begins with an overlapping 

patch embedding, allowing each patch to share information with its neighbors and capture 

local spatial context (Lin et al., 2023). The stages comprise a specific number of 

Transformer blocks (green blocks) with depths of [3, 4, 18, 3], where the two core 

components are the Efficient Self -Attention module, which downsamples the Key and 

Value tensors in equation (1) during attention calculation, and the Mix Feedforward 

Network (Mix -FFN), defined by a two -layer feed -forwar d CNN that injects localized 

spatial information into the attention outputs. Additionally, each Transformer block uses 

residual connections to improve training stability and generalization. The outputs of the 

encoder stages are passed to the decoder head, similar to the ST model, where all outputs 

are projected to a common dimension, enabling fusion across scales. Next, all feature 

maps are upsampled to match the first stage's output, concatenated along the channel 

dimension, and fused. A final 1×1 convolut ional layer reduces the fused tensor to the 

desired number of output classes, producing dense per -pixel predictions. Finally, the 

model’s output is upsampled using bilinear interpolation to match the original input 

resolution of 256×256. 

Figure S5 . Over view of the Prithvi fine -tuning . The model receives an input image of size 

224×224, which is split into non -overlapping patches. A linear projection maps each 

patch into a fixed -dimensional token embedding that are passed through a Transformer 

Encoder (green) consisting of 24 blocks. The encoder processes the tokens to produce 

latent feature representations , which are then passed to a SegFormer Decoder (yellow), 

which aims to reconstruct the original input. S4

Table S 1. Evaluation metrics for algal bloom segmentation using five deep learning 

models: ResUNet, Vanilla ViT, Swin Transformer, SegFormer, and MAE (Prithvi). 

Metrics include recall, precision, F1 -score (Dice coefficient), commiss ion error (false 

positives), and omission error (false negatives). A buffer of 1 pixel was included in the 

ground mask , providing a confidence interval for models’ prediction. Best performance 

values for each metric are highlighted in bold. 

Metrics  ResUNet  Vanilla 

ViT 

Swin 

Transformer  SegFormer  MAE 

Recall  0.68  0.7 4 0.71  0.78  0.54 

Precision  0.70  0.67  0.74  0.63  0.71 

F1 -Score (Dice)  0.69  0.70  0.73  0.70  0.6 2 

> Commission (%)

31.46  32.98  25.28  36.55  28.50 

Omission (%)  29.57  26.17  28.39  21.91  45.45 

Table S 2. Sensitivity analysis of each DL model accuracy with respect to algal bloom 

area proportion. Results shown for six proportion groups composed of 12,255 256x256 

30 -meter patches per group. A buffer of 1 pixel was included in the ground mask ,

providing a confidence interval for models’ predictions . Lowest errors per algal 

proportion are highlighted in bold. 

Error (%)  Model  Algal proportion (%) within patch                  

> 0–0.1 0.1 –55–25 25 –45 45 –85 85 –95

Omission 

ResUNet  23.87  18.99  18.97  27.35  41.66  32.38 

Vanilla ViT  19.20  15.46  17.39  27.79  54.90  35.22 

Swin 

Transformer  26.87  16.49  17.22  25.12  42.20  25.48 

SegFormer  19.54  10.70  12.06  18.26  31.90  24.42 

MAE  28.53  28.20  36.06  53.08  77.79  60.09 

Commission 

ResUNet  3.01  16.88  25.69  32.35  41.06  41.67 

Vanilla ViT  5.13  22.70  34.30  43.40  48.23  47.72 

Swin 

Transformer  3.14  16.02  24.85  33.16  43.13  50.47 

SegFormer  4.37  22.42  33.79  40.88  46.42  48.11 

MAE  5.15  21.78  29.81  33.45  32.04  26.97 S5

Figure S6 . Examples illustrating segmentation results from each evaluated DL model. 

The first two columns show the true and false color compositions of the algal bloom 

occurrences, while the remaining columns illustrate the segmentation results and algal 

bloom reference masks together, showing correctly classified pixels (green), pixels that 

should have been classified as algal bloom but were not (red), and pixels that were 

incorrectly classified as blooms (yellow). The bar plots in the rightmost column sho w the 

correct, omission , and commission proportions for each model.  The location of each 

example is indicated by its MGRS tile ID, with corresponding tile centroids as follows: 

40RDQ ( 56.55 °E, 26.62 °N), 19QFA ( 67.53 °W, 18.49 °N), and 53LDN ( 135.51°E, 

15.48° S). 

Table S 3. Summary of bloom records (2015 –202 2) cataloged by Gernez et al. (2023) and 

other authors , identified by Swin Transformer . For additional details regarding these 

records, please refer to Supplementary Material #2 in the original study. 

Class  Coastal area  Country  Date  Reference 

Cyanophyceae  Albufera lagoo in Menorca  Spain  20180709  HAEDAT ES -18 -014 

Cyanophyceae  Albufera lagoo in Menorca  Spain  20180714  HAEDAT ES -18 -014 

Cyanophyceae  Albufera lagoo in Menorca  Spain  20180724  HAEDAT ES -18 -014 

Cyanophyceae  Albufera lagoo in Menorca  Spain  20180729  HAEDAT ES -18 -014 

Cyanophyceae  Jiquilisco Bay  El Salvador  20190216  HAEDAT SV -19 -001 

Cyanophyceae  Baltic sea  Latvia  20190720  Zettler et al. (2020) 

Cyanophyceae  Baltic sea  Sweden  20190720  Zettler et al. (2020) 

Cyanophyceae  Baltic Sea  Sweden  20150813  HAEDAT SE -15 -012 

Cyanophyceae  Baltic Sea  Sweden  20190726  HAEDAT SE -19 -007, 

Karlson et al. (2021) 

Cyanophyceae  Baltic Sea  Sweden  20160725  HAEDAT SE -16 -006 

Pelagophyceae  Long Island Sound  US  20160717  HAEDAT US -16 -009 

Dinophyceae  Chabahar Bay  Iran  20171025  Dolatabadi et al (2021) 

Dinophyceae  Walker Bay  South Africa  20190225  Smith & Bernard (2020) 

Dinophyceae  Walker Bay  South Africa  20190225  Smith & Bernard (2020) 

Dinophyceae  Gulf of California  Mexico  20180418  HAEDAT MX -17 -014 

Dinophyceae  West Coast of Florida  US  20180728  Weisberg et al. (2019) 

Dinophyceae  West Coast of Florida  US  20180807  Weisberg et al. (2019) 

Dinophyceae  Vilaine estuary  France  20190706  Roux et al. (2022) 

Dinophyceae  Vilaine estuary  France  20190716  Roux et al. (2022) 

Dinophyceae  La Jolla Bay  US  20200415  Kahru et al. (2021) 

Dinophyceae  La Jolla Bay  US  20200423  Kahru et al. (2021) 

Dinophyceae  La Jolla Bay  US  20200425  Kahru et al. (2021) 

Dinophyceae  La Jolla Bay  US  20200425  Kahru et al. (2021) 

Dinophyceae  La Jolla Bay  US  20200425  Kahru et al. (2021) S6

Dinophyceae  South Brittany  France  20210814  REPHY 

Dinophyceae  Chesapeake Bay  US  20200907  HAEDAT US -20 -016 

Litostomatea  Chabahar Bay  Iran  20170408  Ershadifar et al. (2020) 

Litostomatea  Sables Olonne  France  20200411  Phenomer 

Cyanophyceae  Laguna Lake  Philippines  20200904  Caballero & Navarro 

(2021) 

Cyanophyceae  Laguna Lake  Philippines  20200914  Caballero & Navarro 

(2021) 

Cyanophyceae  Laguna Lake  Philippines  20200919  Caballero & Navarro 

(2021) 

Cyanophyceae  Lagoa dos Patos  Brazil  20190227  Qi et al. (2020) 

Cyanophyceae  Lagoa dos Patos  Brazil  20190301  Qi et al. (2020) 

Dinophyceae  NW Aegean Sea  Greece  20190325  HAEDAT GR -19 -002 

Dinophyceae  Sables Olonne  France  20200411  Phenomer 

Dinophyceae  Ria de Vigo  Spain  20170925  Blog fitopasion 

Dinophyceae  Ria de Vigo  Spain  20210904  Blog fitopasion 

Dinophyceae  Gran Canaria  Spain  20160413  Blog fitopasion 

Dinophyceae  East China Sea  China  20190608  Caballero & Navarro 

(2021) 

Dinophyceae  East China Sea  China  20190608  Qi et al. (2020) 

Dinophyceae  East China Sea  China  20190608  Qi et al. (2020) 

Dinophyceae  East China Sea  China  20190608  Qi et al. (2020) 

Dinophyceae  Arabian Sea  Oman  20190314  Qi et al. (2020) 

Dinophyceae  Arabian Sea  Oman  20190314  Qi et al. (2020) 

Dinophyceae  Arabian Sea  Oman  20190314  Qi et al. (2020) 

Cyanophyceae  Gulf of Gdańsk  Poland  20180725  HAEDAT PL -18 -002 

Cyanophyceae  Gulf of Gdańsk  Poland  20200626  HAEDAT PL -20 -001 

Cyanophyceae  Baltic Sea  Sweden  20180731  HAEDAT SE -18 -005 

Cyanophyceae  Baltic Sea  Sweden  20180731  HAEDAT SE -18 -005 

Cyanophyceae  Brazil  20190201  Qi et al. (2020) 

Cyanophyceae  Guadeloupe  France  20180328  REPHY 

Cyanophyceae  Australia  20180603  Gernez et al. (2023) 

Cyanophyceae  Australia  20180603  Gernez et al. (2023) 

Phaeophyceae  Caribean Sea  Haiti  20220908  Qi et al. (2025) 

Ulvophyceae  Yellow Sea  China  20190623  Qi et al. (2020) S7

Figure S7 . Segmentation examples for three OWTs using the CNN - and ViT -based 

models. For each OWT (see Figure S1) , the false color composite ( first row ) shows the 

full scene, followed by the ground truth mask and the model’s prediction s. The location 

of each example is indicated by its MGRS tile ID, with corresponding tile centroids as S8

follows: 40REP (57.55°E, 25.72°N), 21HWB (56.40°W, 34.83°S), 40RDQ (5 6.54°E, 

26.62°N). 

Figure S8 . Segmentation examples under challenging atmospheric conditions . First row 

is a case dominated by high -altitude clouds, and second row is a case affected by strong 

glint. For each case the first column shows the true color com posite, followed by the 

ground truth masks and the four CNN - and ViT -based models. Cloud and shadow masks 

are included in grey and orange, respectively.  The location of each example is indicated 

by its MGRS tile ID, with corresponding tile centroids as follows: 19PBL (71.23°W, 

9.44°N), 40RDP (56.55°E, 25.72°N). 

Figure S9. Sensitivity of FAI –based algal bloom detection using different thresholds 

across four acquisition dates . Each column corresponds to a single date, while each row 

shows th e binary bloom mask (white = detected algae, black = non -bloom) generated 

using progressively increasing FAI thresholds (−0.005, −0.001, +0.001, and +0.05). The 

results illustrate substantial variability in optimal thresholding depending on scene S9

condition s, including atmospheric effects, water background variability, and 

sensor/viewing geometry. The thresholds considered most appropriate for each date are 

highlighted with green borders. 

> Appendix S1: Pre -trained vanilla Vision Transformer

Following the architecture illustrated in Figure 5, t he input 256x256 patches were first 

resized to 224×224 pixels to match the pre -trained weights, and partitioned into non -

overlapping sub -patches of size 16×16, yielding a total of 196 sub -patches per patch. Each 

patch was flattened and linearly projected into a 384 -dimensional embedding space 

through a trainable projection layer. This results in a tensor X of shape [B, 196, 384], 

where B is the batch size. Positional embeddings were added to the tokens to preserve 

spat ial relationships, and the resulting sequence was processed through a series of 8 

transformer encoder blocks (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Each block comprises 6 multi -head 

self -attention (MHSA) and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) sub -layers. MHSA allows the 

mod el to learn information from different representation subspaces by computing 

different attention weights across all token pairs in parallel. Within each MHSA module, 

the tensor X is linearly projected into three new vectors called queries (Q), keys (K), an d

values (V) (Vaswani et al., 2017): 

𝑄 = 𝑋 𝑊 𝑄 , 𝐾 = 𝑋 𝑊 𝐾 , 𝑉 = 𝑋 𝑊 𝑉 (1) 

Where 𝑋 ∈ 𝑅 128 ×196 ×384 as previously explained, and 𝑊 𝑄 ,𝐾 ,𝑉 are learned projection 

matrices. Conceptually, Q encodes what each token is seeking in another token, while K

repr esents what each token offers, and V contains the actual semantic content of the tokens 

(Niu et al., 2021). The attention mechanism computes pairwise interactions by taking the 

dot product between each query and key, producing similarity scores that are sc aled and 

passed through a softmax function to obtain attention weights ( Error! Reference source 

not found. , right panel). These weights are then used to compute a weighted sum of the 

value vectors, allowing the model to aggregate context -aware information from relevant 

tokens (Vaswani et al., 2017): 

𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑄 , 𝐾 , 𝑉 ) = 𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑄 𝐾 𝑇 

> √𝑑 𝑘

) 𝑉 (2) 

d is the dimension of (query, key, value). The attention outputs of e ach head are 

concatenated and linearly transformed to form the final attention output. At each epoch, 

the attention mechanism updates token representations based on pairwise relevance, 

which are then refined by MLP layers to enhance spatial understanding ( Figure 5, left S10 

side) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). While the transformer encoder preserves the token grid 

size, the initial patch embedding downscales the input. The decoder then progressively 

upsamples the latent representations to recover the original reso lution, using projected 

and interpolated skip connections from selected transformer layers for multi -scale feature 

fusion and spatial detail preservation (Figure 5, right side). 

Appendix S 2: Impact of Spectral Index Combinations on Model Performance 

To assess the role of spectral indices in model performance , a comparative experiment 

was conducted with Swin Transformer using three input configurations: 

VNIR+FAI+NDVI, VNIR+NDVI, and VNIR -only. All models were trained using 

identical hyperpa rameters and procedures to ensure consistency (Section 3.4.3) .

Performance metrics for the 2024 validation dataset are provided in Table S4, while 

Figure S10 provides visual comparisons of the predicted bloom masks .

Table S 4. Evaluation metrics for algal bloom segmentation using Swin Transformer 

trained on three input channel configurations . Metrics include recall, precision, F1 -score 

(Dice coefficient), commission error (false positives), and omission error (false 

negatives) .

Metrics  VNIR + NDVI + FAI  VNIR + NDVI  VNIR 

Recall  0.87  0.87  0.89 

Precision  0.42  0.41  0.37 

F1 -Score (Dice)  0.57  0.56  0.52  

> Commission (%)

57.51  59.26  62.94 

Omission (%)  13.12  12.34  10.20 

From Table S4 , the inclusion of NDVI and FAI leads to only marginal changes in overall 

accuracy. However, such metrics do not fully reflect their functional role. As shown in 

Fig. S10, these additional channels primarily affect the spatial representation of the 

predictions, leading to improved delineation of filament structures and reduced 

commission errors along bloom boundaries. Traditional indices are typically applied to 

such mappings using fixed thresholds on individual pixels, whereas deep learning models 

rely on spatial relationships of features represe nted in the image (Blondeau -Patissier et 

al., 2014; Ronneberger et al., 2015). In transformer -based architectures, for example, self -

attention weights are calculated by relative token -to -token contrast rather than absolute 

radiometric magnitude (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). This shift from 

absolute values to relative context fundamentally redefines the role of spectral 

information during training: the model learns to identify features based on their contrast S11 

against the background, and t hus it becomes inherently resilient to scene -wide additive 

offsets. In optically complex waters, uncertainties in the atmospheric correction or 

residual sun glint effects mainly introduce additive offsets in NDVI or FAI values , but 

they can still preserve the spatial contrast and inherent structure of blooms . Consequently, 

the input Rrs bands and the spectral indices serve as high -contrast channels that remain 

informative despite uncertainties in absolute magnitude (Hu et al., 2019; Wang and Hu, 

2021). This potentially explains why NDVI and FAI, although not significantly 

improving accuracy metrics, consistently lead to more consistent bloom delineation in 

optically complex waters. S12 

Figure S10. Qualitative analysis comparing algal bloom mask predictions from three 

different sets of input channels for training: (1) VNIR+NDVI+FAI , (2) VNIR+NDVI, 

and (3) VNIR -only . The first column corresponds to true color composition, followed by 

the ground truth mask and each evaluated model. For each model, p atch -based F1 -scores 

are shown at the bottom of the segmentation masks. 

Appendix S3: Assessing the impact of radiometric uncertainty on final model 

predictions 

Remote sensing reflectance is inherently susceptible to several uncertainties, such as 

atmospher ic correction, adjacency effects, and sun glint , and can potentially affect the 

algal bloom mapping quality . To examine how such uncertainties influence model S13 

performance, w e evaluated the impact of noisy input data on prediction robustness, 

following the approach of Yuan et al. (2025). Here, robustness refers to the ability of a 

model to maintain consistent performance under both nominal and perturbed conditions, 

which is critical for practical applications. A standard method for assessing this resilience 

is the evaluation of performance on data stressed with Gaussian noise (Grandvalet et al., 

1997; Narayanan et al., 2003; Sadeghzadeh et al., 2026). Here, we utilized the bias -

corrected Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) per band from AQUAVis products 

(∆𝑅 𝑟𝑠 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒 = 0.0089 ; ∆𝑅 𝑟𝑠 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒 = 0.0078 ; ∆𝑅 𝑟𝑠 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒 = 0.0058 ; ∆𝑅 𝑟𝑠 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒 = 0.0022 ) to 

simulate realistic sensor noise. The noisy inputs were generated as follows: 

𝑅 𝑟𝑠 ,𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑦 = 𝑅 𝑟𝑠 ,𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 + 𝜀 , 𝜀 ~𝑁 (0, 𝜎 2)

Where 𝜀 represents the Gaussian noise with a mean of zero and variance 𝜎 2. The injected 

noise was proportional to the standard deviation of each inp ut at three levels: 10%, 20%, 

and 30%. The 20% level aligns with typical retrieval uncertainties, particularly in cloudy 

or heterogeneous regions, while the 10% and 30% levels provided a sensitivity range to 

illustrate performance variation under lower and higher uncertainty conditions. To ensure 

statistical significance, we applied 50 Monte Carlo simulations per patch using the 

validation dataset and aggregated the resulting prediction outputs to compare with the 

baseline input image. 

Table S4 . Performance of the Swin Transformer model under increasing levels of injected 

Gaussian noise, calibrated to per -band uncertainty of the AQUAVis products. Metrics are 

reported for the baseline (no noise) and three noise levels (10%, 20%, and 30% of each 

band's standar d deviation), aggregated over 50 Monte Carlo samples per patch on the 

validation dataset. 

Metrics  Baseline  10%  20%  30% 

Recall  0.87  0.85  0.81  0.76 

Precision  0.42  0.44  0.47  0.49 

F1 -Score (Dice)  0.57  0.58  0.59  0.60  

> Commission (%)

57.51  55.79  53.03  51.02 

Omission (%)  13.12  14.77  18.75  23.32 

Results in Table S4 demonstrate that overall model performance remained stable across 

all levels of noise perturbations , with F1 -score holding near constant from 0.57 at baseline 

to 0.60 at 30% of noise level . At the 20% noise level, commission and omission errors 

showed mean differences from the baseline of only -3.8% and 3.3%, respectively (Figure 

S11 A). Spatially, Figur e S 11 B corroborates this pattern, where the difference maps reveal S14 

that at 10% noise, deviations are minimal and spatially diffuse, suggesting that low -level 

uncertainty has a negligible impact on the predicted segmentation structure. At the 30% 

noise leve l, performance shifts are concentrated primarily along the high -frequency edges 

of algae patch boundaries. As also observed on the additional examples in Figure S1 2,

these deviations do not exhibit the structured spatial patterning characteristic of 

system atic artifacts, such as scan -line effects. This indicates that the observed variations 

reflect a genuine sensitivity to input uncertainty rather than the propagation of model -

induced artifacts, confirming the Swin Transformer's robustness to realistic radi ometric 

noise. S15 

Figure S 11 . Qualitative assessment of Swin Transformer robustness to radiometric 

uncertainty. (A) Boxplot of differences between baseline metrics (no noise) and noisy 

metrics (10%, 20%, and 30%). (B) Patch example illustrating models’ performance for 

each noise level. Each row corresponds to a noi se level: baseline (no noise), 10%, 20%, 

and 30% of the per -band standard deviation derived from AQUAVis retrieval uncertainty. 

Columns show, from left to right: the false -color input image, the reference label mask, 

the model prediction probability, and t he spatial difference map between the noisy 

prediction and the baseline prediction. Difference maps highlight pixels where noise -

induced perturbations altered the segmentation outcome, with blue indicating pixels lost 

relative to baseline (omission shifts) and red indicating pixels gained (commission shifts). S16 

Figure S1 2. Patch example illustrating models’ performance for 30% of noise level. Each 

row corresponds to a noise level: baseline (no noise ) and 30% of the per -band standard 

deviation derived from A QUAVis retrieval uncertainty. Columns show, from left to right: 

the false -color input image, the reference label mask, the model prediction probability, 

and the spatial difference map between the noisy prediction and the baseline prediction. 

Difference map s highlight pixels where noise -induced perturbations altered the 

segmentation outcome, with blue indicating pixels lost relative to baseline (omission 

shifts) and red indicating pixels gained (commission shifts).