Title: A Deep Zero-Inflated Model of North Atlantic Right Whale Presence To Support Blue Economy Management in the U.S. East Coast

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.14403v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 01:01:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
> Submitted to the Annals of Applied Statistics

A DEEP ZERO-INFLATED MODEL OF NORTH ATLANTIC RIGHT WHALE PRESENCE TO SUPPORT RESPONSIBLE BLUE ECONOMY MANAGEMENT IN THE U.S. EAST COAST 

BY JIAXIANG JI1,a , L AURA NAZZARO 2,c , J OSH KOHUT 2,d , A HMED AZIZ EZZAT 1,b   

> 1Industrial & Systems Engineering, Rutgers University
> ajj983@scarletmail.rutgers.edu; baa2085@rutgers.edu
> 2Department of Marine & Coastal Sciences, Rutgers University
> cnazzaro@marine.rutgers.edu; dkohut@sebs.rutgers.edu

Effective modeling of endangered marine mammal species, such as the North Atlantic Right Whale, is critical for balancing marine conservation with the growing blue economy. Passive acoustic monitoring data collected by autonomous underwater vehicles provide new opportunities for localized marine species detection and oceanographic sensing, but introduce complex statistical challenges such as zero inflation, imperfect detection, and intri-cate dependence structures. In response, we propose the Deep Zero-Inflated Bernoulli (DeepZIB) model—a deep statistical method which jointly models latent species presence and conditional detection probabilities while learning complex habitat relationships from heterogeneous covariate information. We establish theoretical results on the model’s structural properties and conduct simulation experiments to demonstrate its ability to recover underlying pa-rameters and latent presence fields. Application to real-world passive acous-tic monitoring data on the North Atlantic Right Whale along the U.S. East Coast demonstrates improved model adequacy and predictive performance in capturing the species’ dynamic and spatially varying habitat. A key ad-vantage of DeepZIB is its ability to generate high-resolution, spatially and temporally varying presence maps, providing valuable insights for targeted and risk-aware management of blue economy industries, ranging from off-shore and marine energy, to fisheries management and maritime transport. 

1. Introduction. The blue economy refers to the sustainable and economic use of ocean-based resources, encompassing a wide range of industries, such as fisheries and aquaculture, offshore and marine energy, maritime transport and shipping. These industries contribute substantially to both global and national economies (Global Environment Facility, 2018). However, the development of the blue economy industries is inseparable from its surround-ing marine ecosystem, since critical ecological habitats and industrial offshore activities often occupy the same space. Ensuring their co-existence through responsible, risk-aware manage-ment is therefore essential. A timely exemplar of this co-existence is the North Atlantic Right Whale (NARW), a critically endangered species with fewer than 400 individuals alive (Pettis and Hamilton, 2026). Increasing offshore human development activities pose several con-siderable risks to NARW habitats, including vessel strikes from busy maritime lanes (NOAA Fisheries, 2024a,b), entanglement risks from fishing activities (Knowlton et al., 2012), and se-rious habitat disruption from congested vessel traffic (Laist, Knowlton and Pendleton, 2014). Addressing these growing risks requires effective monitoring strategies of NARW habitats. Traditional approaches have relied on visual sighting data from aerial and vessel line-transect surveys (Davis, Tennant and Van Parijs, 2023; Department of the Navy, 2023). These visual surveys provide valuable information on whale distribution and behavior, but are inherently 

Keywords and phrases: Blue Economy, Marine Mammals, Spatio-Temporal Data, Species Distribution Mod-els, Zero-Inflated Models. 

1

> arXiv:2606.14403v1 [stat.AP] 12 Jun 2026 2

limited by weather, visibility, and species availability. Passive acoustic monitoring (PAM) has emerged as a powerful alternative approach, enabling the continuous monitoring of whale vocalizations under a wide range of environmental conditions (Fucile et al., 2006). More recently, the use of autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) has significantly expanded the capabilities of PAM. For example, the inset in Figure 1(b) shows an underwater glider (a special type of AUV) used in this study for collecting localized data about NARW presence and habitat. When equipped with acoustic sensors, these gliders can navigate quietly through targeted areas for long periods of time to detect marine mammal presence and acquire highly granular habitat information about local oceanic conditions (Dreyfust et al., 2022). A primary use of these data streams is to inform species distribution models (SDMs), which aim to characterize how the presence or distribution of a marine species, such as the NARW responds to spatial and temporal variations in environmental conditions (Miller, 2010). However, applying existing SDMs to these emerging data streams introduces two fundamental statistical challenges. The first is imperfect detection . PAM systems detect ma-rine mammals only when vocalizing, leading to substantial availability bias when whales are present but silent, consequently leading to inflated non-detections. The second challenge pertains to the complexity of the covariate space . Integrating the highly localized PAM data with exogenous oceanographic covariates (such as satellite-derived measurements) yields a highly heterogeneous covariate space. Moreover, the relationship between the presence of NARWs—a highly mobile marine species—and this heterogeneous covariate information is expected to be complex with intricate contextual, spatial, and temporal dependence. Accu-rately capturing these complexities calls for highly expressive models that can adapt to the variability of the ocean environment and the responses of NARWs to such variability. Existing modeling approaches tend to address only one side of the problem. Specifically, many existing SDMs attempt to address the imperfect detection issue. For example, den-sity surface models (DSMs) incorporate detection functions to account for detection biases (Miller et al., 2013). Occupancy models explicitly separate the latent occurrence state from the observation process (MacKenzie et al., 2017), whereas zero-inflated models utilize mix-ture distributions to distinguish between structural absences and missed detections (Lambert, 1992). Despite their utility, these approaches typically rely on rigid parametric assumptions that may not be commensurate with the complex and dynamic habitat of highly mobile and in-telligent marine species such as the NARWs. More recently, machine learning methods have been increasingly used as SDMs especially in the presence of heterogeneous, multi-modal covariate information (Ji et al., 2024). Yet, these approaches still lack explicit mechanisms to account for imperfect detection biases and ecological sampling realities. Moreover, they are comparatively limited in interpretability and uncertainty quantification relative to their statistical counterparts—capabilities that are essential to inform conservation planning and responsible blue economy development. To fill this gap, we propose a Deep Zero-Inflated Bernoulli (DeepZIB) method for model-ing NARW presence conditional on heterogeneous covariate information derived from glider-and satellite-based measurements. DeepZIB is formulated as a probabilistic, spatio-temporal statistical model that explicitly accounts for zero inflation through a custom cross-entropy-based loss function. Embedded within DeepZIB, a deep learning representation acts on the heterogeneous, multi-modal covariate space to learn latent presence fields and conditional de-tection probabilities. In this way, DeepZIB retains the ecological soundness and interpretabil-ity of statistical SDMs, while inheriting the highly expressive power of deep learning meth-ods in capturing complex habitat relationships. We establish theoretical results on DeepZIB’s structural properties and further show that it can be viewed as a generalization of a classi-cal zero-inflated Bernoulli model. Application to modeling NARW presence along the U.S. East Coast—a geographical region with significant blue economy activities—demonstrate 3

improved model adequacy and predictive performance relative to purely statistical or ma-chine learning approaches. In the context of blue economy management, which is the pri-mary motivation of this work, we highlight how DeepZIB’s unique capability to produce high-resolution, spatially and temporally varying presence maps can prove instrumental to support targeted, risk-aware, and responsible management of various offshore industries, ranging from marine and offshore energy, to fisheries management and maritime transport. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews existing approaches for marine mammal habitat modeling. Section 3 describes the multi-source dataset, includ-ing passive acoustic monitoring data collected by autonomous gliders and environmental variables derived from satellite imagery. Section 4 details the formulation of the proposed DeepZIB framework, followed by an examination of its theoretical properties and parameter estimation. Section 5 presents the numerical results, comprising a set of simulation experi-ments, along with a case study on modeling NARW presence in the U.S. East Coast. Finally, Section 6 summarizes our findings and outlines directions for future research. 

2. Literature Review. Statistical approaches have long provided the foundation for marine mammal SDMs by explicitly linking species observations to environmental covari-ates. Regression-based models, including logistic regression and generalized additive models (GAMs), are widely used in species distribution modeling. These methods relate detections or sightings to environmental and oceanographic covariates through predefined link func-tions (Elith and Leathwick, 2009; Best et al., 2012; Monsarrat et al., 2016). DSMs extend regression-based frameworks by explicitly combining spatial modeling approaches with dis-tance sampling (Buckland et al., 2001, 2004). In the classical two-stage formulation (cor-rection for imperfect detection, then spatial modeling), a detection function is first estimated from distance measurements, and then a GAM is fitted to segment-level counts to obtain a spatially varying density surface (Hedley and Buckland, 2004; Miller et al., 2013; Roberts et al., 2016). Alternatively, one-stage DSMs have been proposed in which parameters of the detection and spatial models are estimated simultaneously (Royle, Dawson and Bates, 2004; Royle and Dorazio, 2008; Pardo et al., 2015). Some models adopt point process formulations, modeling detections as realizations of an underlying spatial intensity thinned by the detection function (Johnson, Laake and Ver Hoef, 2010; Yuan et al., 2017). Understandably, DSMs re-quire precise distance measurements to estimate detection functions, which are unavailable in most glider-based platforms. Occupancy models extend regression-based approaches by explicitly separating the eco-logical state from the observation process. In a standard occupancy model, each site is as-sociated with a latent Bernoulli variable denoting true presence, whereas repeated surveys at that site yield detection and non-detection observations which are used to identify the de-tection process (MacKenzie et al., 2002, 2017). These models can be structurally equivalent to Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) when the unobservable species occurrence is assumed to evolve as a latent state over time (MacKenzie et al., 2003; Marescot et al., 2020). From a statistical perspective, colonization and extinction in an occupancy model can correspond to transition probabilities of the hidden state in an HMM, while detection probability defines the observation model (Scott, 2002; Yau et al., 2011; Holsclaw et al., 2017). This framework allows non-detections to be possibly attributed to imperfect detection rather than simply re-garding it as true ecological absence. Occupancy models have an attractive mechanism to account for detection biases, but rely on a site-based, repeated-survey design that does not align with glider-based PAM surveys, where platforms roam continuously over a survey area, rather than revisiting fixed sites. Zero-inflated models were developed to address the frequent occurrence of excess zeros in ecological datasets. In marine mammal monitoring, zeros can arise either because animals 4

are truly absent or because they are present but not detected (i.e., imperfect detection). Zero-inflated formulations explicitly accommodate this by introducing a latent component that governs whether an observation arises from a structural-zero state, together with a conditional model that governs detections or counts when this state is inactive. Depending on the type of response variable, zero-inflated models have been developed in several forms, including zero-inflated Poisson and negative binomial models for count data (Lambert, 1992; Hall, 2000), as well as zero-inflated Bernoulli formulations for binary outcomes (Diop, Diop and Dupuy, 2011; Fulton, Liu and Zeng, 2015; Diop, Diop and Dupuy, 2016; Lee, Pho and Li, 2021; Li and Lu, 2022). In contrast to standard regression models, zero-inflated models allow the zero-generating mechanism to depend on covariates and to differ from the process driving nonzero observations. Unlike occupancy models, they do not require a site-based, repeated-survey design, making them applicable to glider-based PAM data. Despite their utility, standard zero-inflated models are often constrained by rigid paramet-ric assumptions or simplistic functional forms that may inadequately represent the complex and dynamic habitats of highly mobile marine species such as the NARW. This has motivated growing interest in machine learning (ML) approaches, due to their ability to exploit high-dimensional and heterogeneous covariate information for modeling complex habitat relation-ships. Tree- and kernel-based methods, such as boosted regression trees and support vector machines, have demonstrated strong predictive performance in species distribution model-ing across both terrestrial and marine ecosystems (Drake, Randin and Guisan, 2006; Elith, Leathwick and Hastie, 2008; Ji et al., 2024). More recently, deep learning methods have emerged as powerful SDMs in various ecological applications (Chen et al., 2016; Botella et al., 2018; Deneu et al., 2021). Nevertheless, ML methods, in their standard form, do not have explicit mechanisms to account for ecological sampling realities. Specifically, these ap-proaches typically assume perfect detection and do not distinguish between true absence and non-detection. As a result, while these methods offer substantial flexibility and representa-tion capacity, they may not be well aligned with the observational processes that characterize ecological monitoring data, especially those collected using glider-based PAM systems. The above limitations of statistical and ML-based SDMs motivate us to define a hy-brid method, based on a deep zero-inflated approach, which combines the strengths of both paradigms. Our approach therefore belongs to the emerging class of statistical deep learning methods (Krishnan, Shalit and Sontag, 2015; Rangapuram et al., 2018; Ye et al., 2025), in which elements or characteristics of a deep learning architecture are embedded within a sta-tistical approach to perform certain learning tasks. Along these lines, our primary modeling contribution is to introduce a deep zero-inflated probabilistic model for species distribution modeling that is explicitly designed to account for imperfect detection and complex habitat relationships. We establish key theoretical results regarding the model’s structural proper-ties and subsequently apply it to model NARW presence along the U.S. East Coast, a region where expanding blue economy activities would benefit substantially from accurate, high-resolution mapping of critical marine species distributions. 

3. Data Description. This work focuses on the U.S. Mid-Atlantic region, an area that supports a diverse marine ecosystem, including the critically endangered NARW, as well as increased Blue economy activities. Two disparate sources of data are used from this region: (i) autonomous underwater glider observations, providing both acoustic-based detections and localized oceanographic sensing; and ( ii ) satellite-based oceanographic observations. Table 1 provides an overview of the covariates used in this study with their data sources. Details of each data source are described below. 5 

> FIG 1. Sample visualization of satellite and glider data. Panel (a) shows glider-measured environmental variables collected between 8 February and 10 March 2021. Panel (b) displays sea surface temperature (SST) derived from VIIRS Suomi NPP 1-Day 750 m Composite Northwest Atlantic on 27 December 2020, with the corresponding glider track from that mission (grey lines) and a total of 24 detections (green dots) overlaid.

3.1. Glider Datasets. The glider dataset, Z, used in this study was collected from nine Generation 3 Teledyne Slocum glider missions conducted between August 2020 and June 2022, operating off the south coast of New Jersey between 38 .5◦N to 39 .5◦N and 74 .5◦W

to 73 .5◦W . Each glider was equipped with a digital acoustic monitoring (DMON) system developed by Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), enabling near real-time pas-sive detection of marine mammals. The system runs a low-frequency classification algorithm onboard and transmits detected events back to shore for expert validation (Baumgartner and Mussoline, 2011; Baumgartner et al., 2013). As the sound source cannot be localized di-rectly, detections are georeferenced to the glider’s location at the time the sound was recorded. Across all deployments, a total of 104 NARW detections were identified. In addition to acous-tic recordings, the glider simultaneously collected profiles of oceanographic variables at a vertical resolution of 0.25 meters (m), including water temperature, oxygen concentration, salinity, and glider depth. Figure 1(a) shows an example of the oceanographic data collected by a glider during a single deployment. As the glider repeatedly dove and climbed through the water column, it recorded vertical profiles of the oceanographic variables. 3.2. Satellite Datasets. Satellite observations complement the glider dataset by provid-ing broad spatial coverage of surface ocean conditions. The satellite dataset X contains infor-mation about key oceanic variables such as sea surface temperature (SST), chlorophyll con-centration, as well as the frontal value, which reflects the magnitude of differences between adjacent water masses in SST and ocean color variable space (Oliver and Irwin, 2008). One challenge with satellite data is the presence of clouds, which often limits spatial coverage. To mitigate this, we integrate multiple satellite sources to improve overall data availability. Specifically, we use three satellite sources: ( i) “NOAA/NESDIS/STAR GHRSST GOES16 SST Daily Composite SST" (GOES); ( ii ) "VIIRS Suomi NPP 1-Day 750 m Composite North-west Atlantic" (VIIRS); and ( iii ) "MODIS Aqua 3-Day 1 km Composite Northwest Atlantic" (MODIS). Since GOES data are likely to be less affected by clouds due to its geostationary nature, it is always our first choice. When GOES data are unavailable for a given location and time, VIIRS is used next as it offers higher spatial resolution compared to MODIS. MODIS is used as a fallback for SST and chlorophyll when neither of the other two sources is available. 6          

> TABLE 1
> Summary of covariates used in this study, collected from underwater gliders and satellite-based products.
> Data Source Covariate Description
> Glider Temperature ( ◦C) Water temperature Salinity (psu) Total concentration of dissolved salts in seawater Oxygen concentration ( μmol/L) Amount of dissolved oxygen in the water Depth (m) Vertical distance from sea surface to glider’s position Satellite Sea surface temperature ( ◦C) Temperature of the ocean’s surface layer Chlorophyll (mg/m 3)Concentration of the phytoplankton pigment Frontal value Gradient strengths across water mass

Since frontal value is only available from MODIS, we solely rely on MODIS for it. Figure 1(b) presents an example of sea surface temperature map obtained from VIIRS, overlaid with the glider track and detections from a co-located mission. While the satellite image corre-sponds to a specific day, the glider trajectory spans multiple days. The inset in Figure 1(b) shows the glider used in our surveys for illustration purposes. 

4. Methodology. We consider the statistical problem of inferring species presence from imperfect detection data collected over space and time, given exogenous multi-source covari-ate information. Conceptually, the goal is to learn the presence probability as in (1). (1) 

Pr  presence at location s and time t | exogenous satellite and glider covariates X and Z.

We begin by formulating a Zero-Inflated Bernoulli (ZIB) model for PAM data in Section 4.1. Then, in Section 4.2, we introduce the proposed DeepZIB model, which is a generaliza-tion of the ZIB model that internalizes a deep neural network (DNN) for modeling complex covariate effects. This is followed by Section 4.3 where we establish important theoretical properties of the proposed DeepZIB approach. Finally, Section 4.4 describes the estimation and prediction framework. 4.1. The Zero-Inflated Bernoulli model. Let Y (s, t ) ∈ { 0, 1} denote the binary detection outcome at location s ∈ R2 and time t, defined as (2) Y (s, t ) := 

(

1, if a marine mammal is detected at location s and time t, 

0, otherwise .

Similarly, let S(s, t ) ∈ { 0, 1} be a latent binary variable representing the (unobservable) pres-ence state of the marine mammal, defined as (3) S(s, t ) := 

(

1, if a marine mammal is present at location s and time t, 

0, otherwise .

These two processes are not equivalent due to imperfect detections. Let x(s, t ) ∈ Rp de-note the p-dimensional covariate vector associated with the presence process (i.e., covari-ates affecting marine mammal habitat preferences). Similarly, let z(s, t ) ∈ Rq denote the q-dimensional covariate vector associated with the detection process (i.e., covariates affecting the likelihood of detection, conditional on presence). Note that the covariate vectors x(s, t )

and z(s, t ) can share some covariates. In whale-acoustic surveys, the observation data contain a large proportion of zeros. These zeros arise from two different mechanisms. Structural zeros occur when S(s, t ) = 0 , in which case detection is impossible. Non-structural zeros arise when S(s, t ) = 1 but Y (s, t ) = 0 ,7

in which case the whale is present but remains undetected due to silent behavior or sensor limitations. This formulation decomposes the observation process into a presence component and a detection component, thereby providing a principled explanation for the excess zeros observed in the data. The function π(x(s, t ); Θ) defined in (4) denotes the probability that a whale is present at location s and time t, given the covariates x(s, t ).(4) π(x(s, t ); Θ) = P (S(s, t ) = 1 |x(s, t )) .

Conditional on whale presence, the function φ(z(s, t ); Ψ) defined in (5) represents the prob-ability of detecting a whale at location s and time t given the covariates z(s, t ).(5) φ(z(s, t ); Ψ) = P (Y (s, t ) = 1 |S(s, t ) = 1 , z(s, t )) 

where Θ and Ψ denote the parameter sets associated with the presence and detection com-ponents, respectively. The exact composition of Θ and Ψ depends on the specific model considered. For the classical ZIB model, these parameter sets reduce to vectors of regression coeffi-cients, Θ = α, Ψ = β, associated with the presence and detection components, respectively. Both components are typically specified through generalized linear models with a logit link, as expressed in (6) and (7), respectively. (6) πzib (x(s, t ); Θ) = 11 + exp( −x(s, t )⊤α) ,

(7) φzib (z(s, t ); Ψ) = 11 + exp( −z(s, t )⊤β) .

Furthermore, both the presence and the detection processes are assumed to follow the Bernoulli distribution, as expressed in (8) and (9), respectively. (8) S(s, t ) ∼ Bernoulli( π(x(s, t ); Θ)) 

(9) Y (s, t ) | S(s, t ) ∼ Bernoulli( φ(z(s, t ); Ψ)S(s, t )) .

Hence, the ZIB model can be written as follows: 

Pr  Y (s, t )= y |x(s, t ), z(s, t )=1−π(x(s, t ); Θ)1{y=0 }+

π(x(s, t ); Θ)φ(z(s, t ); Ψ)y1−φ(z(s, t ); Ψ)1−y,(10) where observations are assumed to arise from a two-stage process. With a probability of 

1−π(x(s, t ); Θ), the species is absent and the detection is deterministically zero. Meanwhile, with a probability of π(x(s, t ); Θ), the species is present and the detection follows a Bernoulli distribution with a detection probability of φ(z(s, t ); Ψ).For n glider samples (yi, xi, zi)ni=1 , where yi = Y (si, t i), xi = x(si, t i), and zi = z(si, t i),and by letting πi = π(x(si, t i); Θ) and φi = φ(z(si, t i); Ψ), we can express the negative log-likelihood function for the classical ZIB model as follows: (11) L = −

> n

X

> i=1

yilog (πiφi) + (1 − yi)log (1 − πi + πi(1 − φi)) .

The model parameters can be directly estimated by optimizing L. From there, the ZIB model can be used to obtain predictions of presence at any location s and time t for which covariate information, x(s, t ), is available. Importantly, prediction does not require a new glider deployment and can be generated at locations and times where satellite products are available, enabling broad spatial and temporal coverage beyond the glider sampling tracks. 8          

> FIG 2. Illustration of the Deep ZIB framework. The architecture consists of two parallel streams modeling the latent ecological and observation processes. The presence branch (left) integrates satellite-derived environmen-tal covariates x(s, t )via a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and spatiotemporal coordinates (s, t )via a Gaussian Random Field (GRF) to estimate the latent presence probability π(x(s, t )) . Simultaneously, the detection branch (right) maps glider-based covariates z(s, t )through a separate MLP to the conditional detection probability
> φ(z(s, t )) . These probabilities are combined with the observed detection labels yto optimize the zero-inflated loss function, enabling joint optimization of network weights and GRF parameters. The fitted parameters are then applied to new inputs to generate predictions of whale presence probability.

4.2. A proposed deep zero-inflated Bernoulli model. In the classical ZIB model, both the presence and detection functions are specified using parametric regression models. Instead, the proposed DeepZIB approach models these functions through internalized DNNs. The high-level workflow of DeepZIB is shown in Figure 2, and is explained below. Let θ and ψ denote the sets of network weights for the presence and detection functions, respectively. In other words, we set Θ = θ and Ψ = ψ. The corresponding presence and detection functions in DeepZIB are denoted by πdeep (x(s, t ); Θ) and φdeep (z(s, t ); Ψ), and can be expressed as in (12) and (13), respectively. (12) πdeep (x(s, t ); Θ) = 11 + exp( −fθ(x(s, t ))) ,

(13) φdeep (z(s, t ); Ψ) = 11 + exp( −hψ(z(s, t ))) ,

where fθ and hψ are distinct DNN models. The choice of the network architecture for fθ and 

hψ is highly flexible, so long that fθ and hψ remain differentiable with respect to their cor-responding parameter sets, θ and ψ, respectively. Here, we adopted a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to model each of fθ and hψ . Specifically, the input covariates are first normalized, then ReLU activations are used throughout the hidden layers, followed by a sigmoid trans-formation at the output layer to ensure valid probability values. The number of layers and neurons for each network can be different, and is discussed in Section 4.4. 9

We then propose a custom cross-entropy loss function that generalizes that of the classical ZIB model: 

L(deep ) =

> n

X

> i=1

− yi log( πi) − (1 − yi)

h

wi log( πi) + (1 − wi) log  1 − πi

i| {z }

> Non-Structural Zeros

(14) 

− yi log( φi) − (1 − yi) wi log  1 − φi

.

| {z }

> Detections within the Non-Structural Subset

The loss in (14) comprises two components that correspond to distinct parts of the data-generating process. Importantly, we explicitly leverage the fact that a detection constitutes a confirmed presence. That is, for observations with yi = 1 , the latent state is known to be non-structural ( si = 1 ), whereas uncertainty about the latent state arises only for non-detections (yi = 0 ). Hence, the first component in (14) evaluates the prediction of non-structural zeros. For observations with yi = 0 , the latent indicator distinguishing structural from non-structural zeros is unobserved. We therefore introduce wi = Pr( si = 1 |yi = 0) as the posterior proba-bility that a non-detection arises from the non-structural state. This quantity acts as a soft label that allows each zero to contribute probabilistically to the first component of the loss. The second component in (14) evaluates detection within the non-structural subset. Condi-tional on being non-structural, detections are governed by the detection probability φi. This loss penalizes mismatches between observed detections and predicted detection probabilities, with wi to reflect uncertainty about whether detection was possible. Beyond the covariate effects in the presence function captured through fθ , spatial and temporal dependence can be modeled by augmenting the presence predictor in the DeepZIB model with a spatio-temporal Gaussian random field (GRF). In this case, the parameter set can be augmented to include both the network weights θ and the GRF hyperparameters η,that is, we have Θ = ( θ, η). For an observation at location s and time t, the presence proba-bility, now denoted as πdeepst (x(s, t ); Θ), can be expressed as in (15). (15) πdeepst (x(s, t ); Θ) = 11 + exp( −(fθ(x(s, t )) + gη(s, t ))) ,

where gη(s, t ) is a zero-mean GRF with a stationary covariance function denoted by 

K(w, u ), such that w and u are the spatial and temporal lags, respectively. Here, K(w, u )

can be modeled by decomposing the dependence structure over space and time, as in (16). (16) K(w, u ) = κ



Ks(w) × Kt(u)



,

such that κ > 0 is the marginal variance, whereas Ks(w) is a squared exponential kernel as in (17), and Kt(u) is a periodic kernel, as expressed in (18), encoding seasonal periodicity with a period = 12 to reflect a monthly resolution. (17) Ks(w) = exp 



− ∥w∥2

2r2

> w



,

(18) Kt(u) = exp 



− 2 sin 2(π|u|/12) 

r2

> u



,

where rw and ru are spatial and temporal length-scale parameters, respectively. Meanwhile, the detection model retains its own parameter vector Ψ, as defined in Section 4.2. This choice reflects the different roles of the presence and detection models in DeepZIB. Specifically, the presence process represents the underlying ecological habitat relationships. In contrast, the detection process is conditional on presence and primarily driven by local survey conditions. Hence, we do not include an additional GRF term in the detection model. 10 

4.3. Theoretical properties. Here, we establish important theoretical properties of the proposed framework. 4.3.1. Parameter Identifiability in DeepZIB. A model is said to be identifiable when different parameter values generate different distributions for the observable data. For the DeepZIB model, this means that, whenever two parameter sets yield the same distribution for the observable detection process across all covariate values, then they must also yield the same underlying presence and detection functions. This is formally defined in Definition 1, where X and Z denote the feature spaces of the presence and detection covariate vectors 

x(s, t ) and z(s, t ), respectively. For the below theoretical properties, we omit the space-time coordinates s and t for notational simplicity. We also omit the superscripts deep or deepst 

since our focus is mainly on DeepZIB and DeepZIB-ST models. DEFINITION 1. The DeepZIB model is said to be identifiable if, for any two param-eter sets ϑ = ( Θ, Ψ) and ϑ∗ = ( Θ∗, Ψ∗), Pr( Y = y | x, z; ϑ) = Pr( Y = y | x, z; ϑ∗)

for all (x, z) ∈ X × Z implies that π(x; Θ) = π(x; Θ∗) for all x ∈ X , φ (z; Ψ) = φ(z; Ψ∗)

for all z ∈ Z .

To establish identifiability of the DeepZIB model, we require a mild structural assump-tion that the set of detection covariates Z contains at least one continuous variable that is not included in the presence covariate set X . This assumption is well aligned with the dis-tinct roles of the presence and detection components, as covariates governing detection are typically different from those driving ecological presence. Under this assumption, Lemma 1 establishes identifiability by exploiting the factorization of the conditional probability of observation into a presence component and a detection component. LEMMA 1. Under the assumption that there exists a continuous variable zℓ ∈ Z \ X 

such that ∂zℓ log φ(z; ψ) exists, the Deep ZIB model is identifiable if P r (Y = y|x, z; ϑ) = 

P r (Y = y|x, z; ϑ∗) implies π(x; Θ) = π(x; Θ∗) ∀x ∈ X , φ(z; Ψ) = φ(z; Ψ∗) ∀z ∈ Z 

PROOF . Recall that under the DeepZIB model, 

Pr( Y = 1 | x, z; ϑ) = π(x; Θ) φ(z; Ψ),

and Pr( Y = 0 | x, z; ϑ) = 1 − π(x; Θ) φ(z; Ψ). Therefore, equality of the conditional distri-butions for Y is equivalent to equality of Pr( Y = 1 | x, z), and it suffices to consider the case 

y = 1 .Suppose that for all (x, z) ∈ X × Z ,

π(x; Θ) φ(z; Ψ) = π(x; Θ∗) φ(z; Ψ∗).

Taking logarithms of both sides yields (19) log π(x; Θ) − log π(x; Θ∗) = log φ(z; Ψ∗) − log φ(z; Ψ).

The left-hand side of (19) depends only on x, whereas the right-hand side depends only on z.By assumption, there exists a continuous variable zℓ ∈ Z \ X such that ∂zℓ log φ(z; Ψ) exists. Differentiating both sides of (19) with respect to zℓ therefore yields 

∂∂z ℓ



log φ(z; Ψ∗) − log φ(z; Ψ)



= 0 for all z ∈ Z .

It follows that log φ(z; Ψ∗) − log φ(z; Ψ) is constant on Z, and hence there exists a constant 

C > 0 such that 

φ(z; Ψ∗) = C φ (z; Ψ) for all z ∈ Z .11 

Substituting this relation back into the equality of probabilities implies 

π(x; Θ) = C π (x; Θ∗) for all x ∈ X .

To determine the value of C, note that π(·) and φ(·) are probability-valued functions taking values in (0 , 1) . Since the neural network parameterizations are unconstrained apart from the sigmoid output, there exist sequences {xn} ⊂ X and {zn} ⊂ Z such that π(xn; Θ) → 1

and φ(zn; Ψ) → 1. The above relations then imply π(xn; Θ∗) → 1/C and φ(zn; Ψ∗) → C,which is only possible if C ≤ 1 and C ≥ 1. Hence C = 1 .Therefore, 

π(x; Θ) = π(x; Θ∗) ∀ x ∈ X , φ(z; Ψ) = φ(z; Ψ∗) ∀ z ∈ Z ,

which establishes identifiability of the DeepZIB model. 4.3.2. Loss function properties. We train the model using the proposed loss function as expressed in (14). A key property of this loss is that it preserves the gradient structure of the negative log-likelihood with respect to the model outputs (πi, φ i). As a result, gradient-based optimization under the proposed loss follows the same update directions as direct likelihood-based optimization. Lemma 2 formalizes this property. LEMMA 2. For each observation i, let Ji(πi, φ i) denote the negative log-likelihood contribution and let L(deep ) 

> i

(πi, φ i) denote the proposed loss defined in (14). Then, for all 

(πi, φ i) ∈ (0 , 1) 2, ∇(πi,φ i) Li = ∇(πi,φ i) Ji.

PROOF . We consider the two possible outcomes yi ∈ { 0, 1} separately. For yi = 1 , the negative log-likelihood contribution takes the form 

Ji(πi, φ i) = − log( πiφi),

which coincides with the proposed loss Li(πi, φ i) defined in (14). Therefore, 

∇(πi,φ i)Li = ∇(πi,φ i)Ji for all (πi, φ i) ∈ (0 , 1) 2.

For yi = 0 , the negative log-likelihood contribution is given by 

Ji(πi, φ i) = − log (1 − πi) + πi(1 − φi).

Direct differentiation yields 

∂Ji

∂π i

= φi

(1 − πi) + πi(1 − φi) , ∂Ji

∂φ i

= πi

(1 − πi) + πi(1 − φi) .

The proposed loss for yi = 0 can be written as 

Li = −wi log πi − wi log(1 − φi) − (1 − wi) log(1 − πi),

where wi = πi(1 −φi)(1 −πi)+ πi(1 −φi) is evaluated in the forward pass and then treated as fixed when taking gradients. Substituting this expression for wi and differentiating with respect to πi and 

φi shows that 

∂Li

∂π i

= φi

(1 − πi) + πi(1 − φi) , ∂Li

∂φ i

= πi

(1 − πi) + πi(1 − φi) .

Thus, 

∇(πi,φ i)Li = ∇(πi,φ i)Ji for all (πi, φ i) ∈ (0 , 1) 2.12 

4.3.3. Connection to ZIB. Lemma 3 shows that Deep ZIB reduces to the classical ZIB model under linear parameterization, thereby establishing DeepZIB as a generalization of the classical ZIB formulation. LEMMA 3. Consider the Deep ZIB model with π(x; Θ) = 11+exp( −fθ (x)) , φ (z; Ψ) =   

> 11+exp( −hψ(z))

, where fθ and hψ are feed-forward neural networks. Suppose that each net-work consists of a single affine layer with no hidden layers and no intermediate nonlinear activations, then the DeepZIB model reduces to the classical ZIB model. 

PROOF . If fθ and hψ each consist of a single affine map, then there exist coefficient vectors α and β such that fθ(x) = x⊤α and hψ(z) = z⊤β. Substituting into π(x; Θ) and 

φ(z; Ψ) yields exactly the same form of the classical ZIB model. 4.4. Estimation and prediction using DeepZIB. The estimation and prediction steps for DeepZIB are detailed in Algorithm 1. Given the current estimates for the parameter sets 

(Θ, Ψ), the model first runs the forward pass with current network parameters to determine 

π and φ, and then computes the posterior weight w. Fixing w, we can update the loss function 

L(deep ), and then back-propagate to update the network parameters (Θ, Ψ). For a new spatio-temporal observation (x∗, z∗, s∗, t ∗), the trained model evaluates the presence probability ˆπ

and the conditional detection probability ˆφ.For the embedded DNNs, we find that it is more logical for the presence network fθ to have a more complex architecture than the detection network hψ . Specifically, the MLP used to model the presence probability consists of four hidden layers with widths of 128, 64, 32, and 16, respectively, whereas the detection MLP contains three hidden layers with widths of 64, 32, and 16, respectively. All hidden layers use ReLU activations and are followed by a final linear layer with a sigmoid activation. For the GRF model, we employed a variational Gaus-sian Process approximation using a set of inducing points, enabling scalable model training. The optimization was performed using the Adam optimizer, whereas a grid search was used to tune the number of hidden layers, the number of epochs, and the learning rate. To generate spatial probability maps, monthly satellite covariate fields are first constructed by temporally averaging the original satellite products within each month. These monthly covariate maps have a regular spatial grid with a resolution of 0.01 ◦ × 0.01 ◦ (≈ 1.24 km 2). For each grid point, the corresponding covariates and spatial coordinates are passed through the trained model to obtain ˆπ(s, t ), which are then visualized as monthly presence probability maps. 

5. Results. This section presents the experimental evaluation of the proposed models. First, we present the experimental setup, including the benchmarks and evaluation metrics. Section 5.2 reports the results of a simulation case study. This is then followed by Section 5.3 where the real-world case study on modeling NARW presence is presented. 5.1. Experimental Setup. We evaluate the proposed Deep ZIB model against the follow-ing representative sets of benchmarks: 1. Machine learning models , including Logistic Regression (LR), Extreme Gradient Boost-ing (XGBoost), and Multilayer Perceptrons (MLP). These approaches learn a direct map-ping from covariates to observed detections, but assume perfect detection, thereby lacking a mechanism to differentiate between true ecological absence and non detections. 2. Classical zero-inflated Bernoulli (ZIB) model, which explicitly accounts for excess zeros by introducing a latent structure that separates structural zeros from non-structural zeros. This is the same model described in Section 4.1. 13 

Algorithm 1: Estimation and prediction for the Deep ZIB model 

Input: Training samples {(xi, zi, si, t i, y i)}ni=1 ; Learning rate ρ; Number of epochs T ; Batch size B;Prediction samples {(˜ xj , ˜zj , ˜sj , ˜tj )}mj=1  

> 1

Initialize network parameters (θ, η, ψ); GRF parameters η. 

> 2

for t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 3

partition training indices into mini-batches B of size B; 

> 4

for each mini-batch B do  

> 5

Forward step: For each i ∈ B , compute 

πi = 11 + exp  −(fθ(xi) + gη(si, t i)) 

φi = 11 + exp  −hψ(zi) .wi =



1, yi = 1 ,

(1 − πi)(1 − φi)

πi + (1 − πi)(1 − φi) , yi = 0 . 

> 6

Mini-batch objective: 

L(deep ) 

> B

= 1

|B| 

X

> i∈B

(1 − wi) log πi + wi log(1 − πi) + wi(yi log φi + (1 − yi) log(1 − φi)) . 

> 7

Parameter update: All parameters are updated jointly using a gradient-based optimizer (Adam) 

(θ, η, ψ) ← Adam  (θ, η, ψ), ∇L (deep ) 

> B

, ρ . 

> 8

Using the fitted parameters (θ∗, η∗, ψ∗), compute the presence probability for each j:

ˆπj = 11 + exp( − fθ∗ (˜ xj ) + gη∗ (˜ sj , ˜tj ))

Output: Estimated parameters (θ∗, η∗, ψ∗), Predicted presence probabilities {ˆπj }mj=1 

The presence probability is the primary target of interest, hence all evaluations are per-formed on the predicted presence probabilities ˆπi using the following metrics: 1. Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC), as defined in (20), where D1, D2 denote the sets of presence and absence samples. Higher values of AUC indicate better performance in distinguishing the presence and absence states. (20) AUC = 

P

> i∈D 1

P 

> j∈D 2

1(ˆ πi > ˆπj )

|D 1||D 2| .

2. F1 score, which is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, as expressed in (21). Higher values indicate better classification performance. (21) F1 = 2 × Pni=1 1(si = 1 , ˆsi = 1) 

Pni=1 1(si = 1) + Pni=1 1(ˆ si = 1) .

3. Mean absolute error (MAE) measuring the divergence between the predicted and true probabilities, as expressed in (22). (22) MAE = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

ˆπi − πi .14 

4. Brier score which measures the difference between ˆπi and the binary presence indicators 

si, as defined in (23). Smaller values of the Brier score correspond to better performance. (23) Brier score = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

 ˆπi − si

2.

5. Negative log-likelihood (NLL), which measures the adequacy of the model, as expressed in (24). Lower values of NLL indicates a more adequate model. (24) NLL = −

> n

X

> i=1

h

si log(ˆ πi) + (1 − si) log  1 − ˆπi

i

.

For the simulation experiments (Section 5.2), ground truth labels and presence probabil-ities are available, so all evaluation metrics can be calculated. In the real-world case study (Section 5.3), the true presence probabilities are unknown and only detection labels yi are observed, so we can solely evaluate the models using the Brier score and NLL. 5.2. Simulated case studies. To mimic real-world settings, we simulate the detection and presence data along an actual glider path from our real-world dataset. First, we extract the covariate information for the glider- and satellite-based variables (listed in Table 1) at the spatial locations corresponding to the glider trajectory for model training. For extrapolation purposes, we also extract the satellite-based covariate information at spatial and temporal windows of interest, beyond those sampled by the glider. Figure 3 shows representative co-variate maps of the frontal value, chlorophyll, and sea surface temperature in February 2022, with glider track and detections overlaid.  

> FIG 3. Representative covariate maps associated with the simulation study with glider path and simulated detec-tions overlaid. Panels (a)–(c) display the spatial distributions of the frontal value, chlorophyll, and sea surface temperature on February 2022, respectively.

Next, we consider two simulated case studies for generating the true presence and detec-tion data, referred to hereinafter as Case Study I and II. In Case Study I, we simulate presence and detection probabilities based on a simple linear functional form, as defined in (25) and (26), respectively, such that xij is the ith observation of the jth covariate in x. Similarly, zij 

is the ith observation of the jth covariate in z. Here, the covariate vector for the presence process is defined as: 

x = ( Frontal Value, Sea Surface Temperature, Chlorophyll, Distance to shore, Seasonal term) ,

where the distance to shore is calculated based on the Euclidean distance from the points to the coastline, whereas the seasonal term is the sine and cosine transformation of the month. The covariate vector for the detection process is defined as: 

z = ( Depth, Temperature, Salinity, Oxygen concentration, Elevation, Distance to shore) .15 

(25) πi = 11 + exp   − (−1.5 + 3 xi1 − xi2 + xi3 + 0 .8xi4 − 0.4xi5 + 0 .8xi6) ,

(26) ϕi = 11 + exp   − (0 .1 + 0 .4zi1 + 0 .5zi2 − 0.9zi3 − zi4 + 0 .3zi5 + 0 .5zi6) .

In Case Study II, presence and detection probabilities are simulated using a more complex, non-linear functional form, as expressed in (27) and (28), respectively.                                  

> (27) πi=11 + exp
> 
> −−1.2 + 0 .6xi1−1.5xi2+ 1 .7xi3+ 1 .5xi4−xi5+ 0 .4xi6
> + 1 .5xi1xi2+ 0 .2xi4xi5+ 1 .6xi1xi4+ sin(2 xi1) + 0 .5 cos(3 xi2) + 0 .4 cos( xi4)
> .
> (28) ϕi=11 + exp
> 
> −0.6 + 0 .5zi1+ 0 .2zi2+ 0 .6zi3+ 0 .2zi4−0.3zi5+ 0 .5zi6
> + 0 .4zi1zi4+ 0 .5zi3zi6−zi2zi3+ 0 .6 sin(1 .5zi3)−0.5p|zi6|+ 2 sin( zi1)
> .

Given covariate information, the presence probabilities are first generated (based on the func-tional forms in (25) for Case Study I and (27) for Case Study II). A latent presence state is then generated according to the Bernoulli distribution in (8). Conditional on the presence state, the detection probability is computed using the detection-related covariates (based on the functional forms in (26) for Case Study I and (28) for Case Study II). Detection labels are then generated according to the Bernoulli distribution in (9). If the species is absent, no detection is recorded. Note that during model fitting, only the detection labels and respec-tive covariate information are “seen” by the model, mimicking the information available in a real-world setting. We conduct a total of 100 simulations, where for each simulation, we adopt a five-fold cross validation. Simulated observations are randomly partitioned into five folds, with four folds used for training and the remaining fold used for testing. We then use detection labels and covariate information to train all models listed in Section 5.1. Note that we differentiate between DeepZIB and Deep ZIB-ST, based on whether or not a latent GRF is added in the presence function. To compute the AUC and F1 score, we convert predicted probabilities into class labels (absent or present) through a classification threshold τ , such that ˆsi = 1{ˆπi ≥ τ }.To ensure fairness, the threshold is determined for each method using Youden’s J index (Youden, 1950), which identifies the point on the ROC curve that maximizes the separation between true positive rate and false positive rate. Table 2 reports the results under Case Study I (linear detection and presence functions). Here, it is evident that models that explicitly account for imperfect detection outperform mod-els that assume perfect detection (mainly the ML models). Although the ML models (logistic regression, XGBoost, and MLP) achieve moderate AUC values, they exhibit substantially higher Brier scores, NLL, and MAE, reflecting systematic mismatch induced by ignoring latent presence. Within the class of zero-inflated models, the classical ZIB model attains the best overall performance for Case Study I (linear presence and detection functions), which is expected given that the data-generating approach matches its parametric assumptions. Impor-tantly, the proposed DeepZIB variants achieve comparable performance with slight degrada-tion relative to the Classical ZIB model, indicating that the additional flexibility does not lead to overfitting and perform reasonably well even if underlying relationships are linear. Table 3 summarizes the results under Case Study II (non-linear detection and presence functions). In this case, the classical ZIB model suffers substantial degradation across all 16 

TABLE 2

Case Study I (Linear scenario): performance comparison for the presence process across multiple benchmark models. Bold-faced values denote best performance. Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations around the average reported values. 

Model Threshold τ AUC ( ↑) F1 Score ( ↑) MAE ( ↓) Brier ( ↓) NLL ( ↓)XGBoost 0.100 (0.008) 0.848 (0.009) 0.635 (0.015) 0.124 (0.003) 0.140 (0.004) 0.457 (0.012) LR 0.117 (0.013) 0.824 (0.008) 0.572 (0.015) 0.135 (0.003) 0.145 (0.004) 0.469 (0.012) MLP 0.467 (0.029) 0.864 (0.008) 0.654 (0.017) 0.133 (0.009) 0.125 (0.005) 0.400 (0.012) ZIB 0.252 (0.044) 0.885 (0.006) 0.687 (0.015) 0.023 (0.007) 0.096 (0.003) 0.319 (0.008) 

Deep ZIB 0.235 (0.032) 0.881 (0.007) 0.680 (0.014) 0.035 (0.005) 0.098 (0.003) 0.326 (0.009) Deep ZIB-ST 0.248 (0.033) 0.881 (0.007) 0.682 (0.014) 0.036 (0.006) 0.098 (0.003) 0.326 (0.009) 

TABLE 3

Case Study II (Non-linear scenario): performance comparison for the presence process across multiple benchmark models. Bold-faced values denote best performance. Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations around the average reported values. 

Model Threshold τ AUC ( ↑) F1 Score ( ↑) MAE ( ↓) Brier ( ↓) NLL ( ↓)XGBoost 0.119 (0.015) 0.764 (0.011) 0.537 (0.015) 0.136 (0.004) 0.161 (0.004) 0.553 (0.018) LR 0.114 (0.010) 0.704 (0.009) 0.472 (0.011) 0.167 (0.002) 0.177 (0.004) 0.573 (0.013) MLP 0.557 (0.040) 0.798 (0.011) 0.572 (0.017) 0.162 (0.008) 0.160 (0.005) 0.485 (0.013) ZIB 0.380 (0.065) 0.775 (0.015) 0.551 (0.024) 0.164 (0.024) 0.194 (0.016) 1.005 (0.301) Deep ZIB 0.256 (0.032) 0.849 (0.007) 0.629 (0.013) 0.050 (0.005) 0.118 (0.003) 0.382 (0.009) 

Deep ZIB-ST 0.293 (0.031) 0.849 (0.007) 0.629 (0.013) 0.055 (0.006) 0.119 (0.004) 0.386 (0.010) 

FIG 4. Presence probability map comparison for the simulation study. Left side is the ground truth probability map and right side is the predicted probability map for February 2022 using DeepZIB-ST. 

metrics, reflecting its inability to capture the non-linear covariate effects by its rather rigid parametric assumptions. XGBoost, which is a powerful ML approach, performs better than ZIB, even when trained directly on the detection labels. By contrast, the proposed DeepZIB and Deep ZIB-ST models consistently achieve the best performance across all evaluation metrics. This is attributed to their ability to simultaneously model the zero-inflated structure of the data, as well as their flexibility to learn nonlinear covariate effects. Overall, these results confirm that properly accounting for zero inflation is essential, and that functional flexibility becomes critical when the true ecological relationships are complex. To further assess spatial prediction capability under the nonlinear simulation setting, Fig-ure 4 compares the predicted presence probability map against the simulated ground truth. Evaluating spatial accuracy is essential because a primary goal of our framework is to pro-17                    

> TABLE 4
> Model evaluation on detected NARWs on the test set. Bold-faced values denote best performance.
> Metric XGBoost LR MLP ZIB Deep ZIB Deep ZIB-ST BS ( ↓)0.9594 0.9728 0.9479 0.8431 0.8415 0.6560
> NLL ( ↓)3.8951 4.5313 3.7549 3.9789 2.9129 1.8998

vide reliable extrapolations at new or unobserved locations, not only at sites where NARWs are observed, thereby ensuring relevance to informing blue economy management. Here, the model is trained on simulated observations through January 2022 and evaluated on simulated observations from February 2022. The resulting probability map in Figure 4(b) closely re-produces both the high-probability hot spots and the broader spatial gradients present in the ground truth. This demonstrates that the proposed method not only captures individual-level detection patterns but also generalizes well across space and time. 5.3. Modeling North Atlantic Right Whale Presence in the U.S. Mid-Atlantic. We use the data described in Section 3 to train our proposed DeepZIB and DeepZIB-ST models. Similar to the simulated experiments, the covariate vector for the presence process is defined as: 

x = ( Frontal Value, Sea Surface Temperature, Chlorophyll, Distance to shore, Seasonal term ),

whereas the covariate vector for the detection process is defined as: 

z = ( Depth, Temperature, Salinity, Oxygen concentration, Elevation, Distance to shore ).

The model is trained using all historical observations collected prior to February 2022 and evaluated on data from February 2022 through September 2022. Since the latent presence state cannot be observed directly, evaluating the model’s per-formance relies on indirect evidence. We exploit the fact that acoustic detections have mini-mal false positives (Johnson et al., 2022), that is, a positive detection is equivalent to whale presence at a given location and time, whereas non-detections may arise from either true absence or imperfect detection. Under this assumption, whale detections can be treated as reliable, though incomplete, indicators of presence. We therefore evaluate the model’s pre-dictive performance using probabilistic metrics such as NLL and Brier score, which assess the quality of the predicted probability values. Table 4 presents the Brier Score and Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) for all benchmark models, evaluated exclusively on points with con-firmed acoustic detections (i.e., detection = 1), which serve as a proxy for whale presence. Among the models, DeepZIB-ST achieves the best performance with the lowest NLL and Brier Score, followed by DeepZIB, and then ZIB as a distant third. In contrast, ML clas-sifiers, which treat detection as direct evidence of presence without modeling latent states, yield significantly higher NLL and Brier Scores. These results align with the insights derived from the simulated case studies in Section 5.2. Furthermore, we conduct an external validation by comparing the spatial patterns of our predicted presence probability maps with independently derived NARW density estimates derived from the DSM developed by the Marine Geospatial Ecology Lab at Duke University (Roberts et al., 2016; Marine Geospatial Ecology Lab, Duke University, 2022). We note that this comparison is not intended to quantify predictive accuracy of either model, as the two modeling frameworks rely on different data sources, assumptions, and responses. Specifi-cally, the latter predicts the density of NARWs (individuals/unit area) and is trained on visual line-transect survey data. While it does not represent the golden ground truth, it is a long-standing and well-established model in the literature, and has been evaluated independently on PAM data, showing positive correlations (Roberts et al., 2024). The top row in Figure 5 presents the spatial probability maps of NARW presence produced by DeepZIB-ST for 18  

> FIG 5. Visual comparison between the spatial probability maps of NARW presence produced by DeepZIB-ST (top row) and the corresponding NARW density maps derived from the density surface model developed by the Marine Geospatial Ecology Lab (Roberts et al., 2016; Marine Geospatial Ecology Lab, Duke University, 2022), for the months of February, March, April, and May 2022.

February, March, April, and May 2022. A clear temporal pattern is observed: higher predicted probabilities are concentrated in February and March, followed by a gradual decline in the following months. The corresponding DSM-based maps are shown in the bottom row of Fig-ure 5. To produce such maps, we used the OBIS-SEAMAP mapping tool and only trimmed the region that is correspondent to our study area (Halpin et al., 2009; Marine Geospatial Ecology Lab, Duke University, 2022). Comparing the distribution and density maps in the top and bottom rows respectively, we find that the overall spatial and temporal presence trends predicted by DeepZIB-ST align, to some extent, with those in the DSM-based density maps, for example in terms of the location and timing of hot spots and seasonal variations. In par-ticular, as we approach summer, both the predicted probability (DeepZIB-ST, top row) and the estimated density (DSM, bottom row) are consistently decreasing, which may reflect the seasonal migration behavior of NARWs away from the study region (Whitt, Dudzinski and Laliberté, 2013). For both sets of maps, there appears to be an increase in whale distribution (and density) as the distance from shore increases. The two approaches differ primarily in the spatial and temporal resolution at which NARWs are modeled. The DSM model is designed to model population-level density of NARWs over fairly large spatial and temporal scales, while our approach primarily leverages where ML is typically most useful—to model fine-scale covariate effects at high spatial and temporal resolutions. We discuss in Section 5.4 the relevance of such fine-grained predictions to localized decision support in the blue economy. The importance of explicitly modeling imperfect detection is evident when comparing the outputs of the zero-inflated models versus those without a mechanism to account for zero inflation. Figure 6 shows the spatial probability maps of NARW presence generated using logistic regression (panel a), ZIB (panel b), and DeepZIB-ST (panel c) for February 2022. All models have been trained on the same datasets. Here, logistic regression, which treats non-detections as absences, produces unrealistically flat probability maps. This occurs be-cause the model is forced to explain all non-detections as ecological absence. In contrast, the ZIB formulation identifies regions of elevated presence probability. This confirms the im-portance of modeling imperfect detection. The contribution of the deep component becomes apparent when comparing the spatial predictions from the ZIB model (panel b) with those from the DeepZIB-ST model (panel c). ZIB produces a fairly simplistic spatial pattern, with 19                        

> FIG 6. Presence probability map produced by Logistic Regression (panel a), ZIB (panel b) and Deep ZIB (panel c) on February 2022.
> TABLE 5
> Leave-one-feature-out contribution to the presence component.
> Model NLL ∆NLL ∆π
> Frontal value + SST + chlorophyll + Seasonal term + Distance to shore 1.8998 --Frontal value + SST + chlorophyll + Distance to shore 3.2081 +1.3083 -0.1439 Frontal value + SST + chlorophyll + Seasonal term 3.0000 +1.1002 -0.1395 SST + chlorophyll + Seasonal term + Distance to shore 2.6475 +0.7477 -0.0860 Frontal value + chlorophyll + Seasonal term + Distance to shore 2.4496 +0.5498 -0.0668 Frontal value + SST + Seasonal term + Distance to shore 2.3023 +0.4025 -0.0826

uniform spatial gradients, which is unlikely to reflect realistic NARW distributions. In con-trast, DeepZIB-ST shows significantly more localized spatial variations, possibly implying that the deep component is using the underlying environmental covariates to express com-plex, finer-scale habitat structure, which the linear ZIB formulation cannot capture. Again, this aligns well with the insights derived from our simulation experiments in Section 5.2 where the classical ZIB models performed reasonably well in linear scenarios, but suffered substantial performance degradation in the non-linear case. The latter appears to be closer to the ecological reality of NARWs and their complex habitats. To better assess which covariates are most influential to drive the probability of pres-ence, we conducted a leave-one-feature-out analysis and evaluated the resulting change in NLL on the ground-truth presence set. As shown in Table 5, removing any covariate leads to a degradation in model fit, indicating that all variables provide important habitat infor-mation, yet at different magnitudes. Removing distance to shore or seasonal terms led to the largest change in model fit, indicating that spatial patterns and seasonality (driven by month of the year) play a dominant role in predicting NARW presence. Oceanographic vari-ables also contribute meaningfully, with the order of importance being: frontal value, SST, then chlorophyll. These findings are consistent with the habitat-related patterns of NARWs. In particular, the dominant influence of distance to shore and seasonal terms suggests that large-scale spatial and migratory patterns define the primary envelope of NARW presence in this geographical region. Within this envelope, localized oceanographic information play an important role in shaping finer-scale habitat suitability. Among them, the frontal value emerges as a particularly informative predictor, aligning with its role as a proxy for oceano-graphic processes linked to prey aggregation (Baumgartner et al., 2003; Dreyfust et al., 2022; Ji et al., 2024). Meanwhile, sea surface temperature and chlorophyll, which are commonly included as environmental covariates in species distribution models, exhibit comparatively lower, but still considerable, contributions—conclusions that align with prior NARW studies (Pendleton et al., 2012; Garrison et al., 2012; Roberts et al., 2024) 20 

5.4. Connection to Blue Economy Management. The proposed framework offers distinct operational advantages for the conservation of the critically endangered NARW in settings where mitigation must be deployed in space and time rather than uniformly across an en-tire region. Dynamic ocean management was developed precisely for such contexts: rather than imposing static boundaries on mobile species and changing ocean conditions, it seeks to update management in response to changing biological and oceanographic information (Maxwell et al., 2015). For rare species such as NARWs, the core management problem is not whether to mitigate, but when and where to mitigate, so that protective measures can be targeted without imposing unnecessary economic disruptions. This need for spatially targeted information is already noticeable in current NARW mit-igation efforts. For example, vessel speed rules are in place to enforce vessels to travel at 10 knots or less in designated seasonal management areas along the U.S. East Coast, and those areas are defined as explicit geographic polygons or coastal bands (NOAA Fisheries, 2025a). NOAA also frequently issues slow zones and dynamic management areas following visual or acoustic detections. In fisheries management, marine mammal protection includes area-based measures aimed at reducing entanglement risks (NOAA Fisheries, 2025b). Simi-lar operational needs arise in offshore energy sectors such as offshore wind farm construction, operations, and maintenance, where proactive decisions about vessel routing and scheduling will depend on spatially resolved information about marine mammal presence (Silber et al., 2023; Papadopoulos, Coit and Ezzat, 2021; Petersen et al., 2026). DeepZIB is designed to produce outputs that can be directly paired with these mitiga-tion policies. As seen in Figure 5, the model generates probability maps that retain local heterogeneity at scales relevant to spatial and temporal management of the blue economy. In this way, DeepZIB provides a principled pathway from high-frequency monitoring data to risk-aware information that can support high-resolution management. While DeepZIB model operates on a continuous spatial domain, the probability maps in this study are rendered on a grid of 0.01 ◦ (approximately 1 km). This resolution is primarily determined by the spatial support of the environmental covariates used for prediction, but it is also scientifically and operationally meaningful. Ecologically relevant ocean structure can vary at submesoscale ranges, including horizontal scales on the order of about 1 km (McWilliams, 2016). For NARWs, available evidence suggests that habitat use may involve multiple spatial scales: broader environmental cues may help identify suitable foraging habitat at scales of roughly 10–100 km, whereas prey-search behavior may occur at much finer scales of approximately 0.1 to 1 km (Sorochan et al., 2021). Dynamic ocean management frameworks similarly em-phasize management that adapts in space and time, refining the scale of managed areas in order to better balance conservation and economic objectives (Maxwell et al., 2015; Dunn et al., 2016). In this context, the kilometer-scale spatial resolution of the DeepZIB frame-work is operationally meaningful, as it is well aligned with the broader transition toward spatially targeted, dynamic management strategies. 

6. Conclusion. In this paper, we proposed a Deep Zero-Inflated Bernoulli (Deep ZIB) framework that integrates the statistical structure of zero-inflated models with the representa-tional capacity of deep learning. Results from both simulation studies and a real-world case study demonstrate that this hybrid formulation yields systematic improvements over clas-sical statistical SDMs and purely machine-learning-based benchmarks. A key advantage of DeepZIB is its ability to generate high-resolution, spatially and temporally varying presence maps, providing valuable insights for targeted and risk-aware management of blue economy industries, ranging from offshore and marine energy, to fisheries management and maritime transport. Despite these promising results, a number of limitations point to important directions for future research. First, while our model relies on satellite-derived oceanographic variables to 21 

infer whale presence, the spatial distribution of NARWs will be partly driven by prey avail-ability. It is true that physical proxies such as SST, chlorophyll, and frontal value provide indirect information about habitat suitability, but may decouple from prey fields under cer-tain conditions. Incorporating prey distribution therefore represents a natural step forward. Second, although the detection process is explicitly modeled as a separate component, it remains an approximation of a complex acoustic observation mechanism. Factors such as ambient noise and acoustic propagation conditions can substantially affect detection proba-bility and are not fully captured by the current set of glider-based covariates. Extending the detection function in our model to better account for acoustic variability would further refine the separation between true ecological absence and observation failure. Third, while spatially resolved satellite products are used as model inputs, the current for-mulation uses an MLP architecture, therefore processing covariate information in a pointwise manner and therefore does not fully exploit the spatial context embedded in the satellite im-agery. This is instead accounted for by the spatio-temporal GRF model that has been added in DeepZIB-ST. However, further work could explore more advanced DNN approaches (e.g. convolutional, graph, or attention-based models) to directly extract spatial features from the satellite imagery, thereby enabling the model to better capture spatial gradients that are dif-ficult to represent using pointwise covariates. This naturally would complicate the parameter learning process and may require careful methodological and algorithmic solutions. From a decision-making context, an important avenue for future research lies in integrating the probabilistic outputs from our models operational decision-support systems for advanc-ing responsible blue economy development and operation. For example, presence probabil-ity maps derived from our framework have the potential to inform risk-aware planning in offshore wind development and maintenance, vessel routing, fisheries management, and dy-namic spatial zoning, supporting mitigation strategies that balance conservation objectives with human activities in the context of the growing blue economy. REFERENCES 

BAUMGARTNER , M. F. and M USSOLINE , S. E. (2011). A generalized baleen whale call detection and classifi-cation system. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 129 2889–2902. BAUMGARTNER , M. F., C OLE , T. V., C LAPHAM , P. J. and M ATE , B. R. (2003). North Atlantic right whale habitat in the lower Bay of Fundy and on the SW Scotian Shelf during 1999-2001. Marine Ecology Progress Series 264 137–154. BAUMGARTNER , M. F., F RATANTONI , D. M., H URST , T. P., B ROWN , M. W., C OLE , T. V., V AN PARIJS , S. M. and J OHNSON , M. (2013). Real-time reporting of baleen whale passive acoustic detections from ocean gliders. 

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 134 1814–1823. BEST , B. D., H ALPIN , P. N., R EAD , A. J., F UJIOKA , E., G OOD , C. P., L ABRECQUE , E. A., S CHICK , R. S., ROBERTS , J. J., H AZEN , L. J., Q IAN , S. S. et al. (2012). Online cetacean habitat modeling system for the US east coast and Gulf of Mexico. Endangered Species Research 18 1–15. BOTELLA , C., J OLY , A., B ONNET , P., M ONESTIEZ , P. and M UNOZ , F. (2018). A deep learning approach to species distribution modelling. In Multimedia Tools and Applications for Environmental & Biodiversity In-formatics (A. Joly, S. Vrochidis, K. Karatzas, A. Karppinen and P. Bonnet, eds.) 169–199. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76445-0_10 BUCKLAND , S. T., A NDERSON , D. R., B URNHAM , K. P., L AAKE , J. L., B ORCHERS , D. L. and T HOMAS , L. (2001). Introduction to Distance Sampling: Estimating Abundance of Biological Populations . Oxford Univer-sity Press, Oxford, UK. BUCKLAND , S. T., A NDERSON , D. R., B URNHAM , K. P., L AAKE , J. L., B ORCHERS , D. L. and T HOMAS , L., eds. (2004). Advanced Distance Sampling: Estimating Abundance of Biological Populations . OUP Oxford, Oxford, UK. CHEN , D., X UE , Y., C HEN , S., F INK , D. and G OMES , C. P. (2016). Deep Multi-Species Embedding. CoRR 

abs/1609.09353 .DAVIS , G., T ENNANT , S. and V AN PARIJS , S. (2023). Upcalling behaviour and patterns in North Atlantic Right Whales, implications for monitoring protocols during wind energy development. ICES Journal of Marine Science fsad174. 22 

DENEU , B., S ERVAJEAN , M., B ONNET , P., B OTELLA , C., M UNOZ , F. and J OLY , A. (2021). Convolutional neural networks improve species distribution modelling by capturing the spatial structure of the environment. 

PLoS Computational Biology 17 e1008856. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008856 DIOP , A., D IOP , A. and D UPUY , J.-F. (2011). Maximum likelihood estimation in the logistic regression model with a cure fraction. Electronic Journal of Statistics 5 460–483. https://doi.org/10.1214/11-EJS616 DIOP , A., D IOP , A. and D UPUY , J.-F. (2016). Simulation-based inference in a zero-inflated Bernoulli regression model. Communications in Statistics–Simulation and Computation 45 3597–3614. DRAKE , J. M., R ANDIN , C. and G UISAN , A. (2006). Modelling ecological niches with support vector machines. 

Journal of Applied Ecology 43 424–432. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2006.01141.x DREYFUST , C., K OHUT , J., N AZZARO , L., B RODIE , J., O LIVER , M. and B AUMGARTNER , M. (2022). Aligning the seasonal migration of North Atlantic Right Whales with oceanic features. In OCEANS 2022, Hampton Roads 1–9. IEEE. DUNN , D. C., M AXWELL , S. M., B OUSTANY , A. M. and H ALPIN , P. N. (2016). Dynamic ocean management increases the efficiency and efficacy of fisheries management. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

113 668-673. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1513626113 ELITH , J., L EATHWICK , J. R. and H ASTIE , T. (2008). A working guide to boosted regression trees. Journal of Animal Ecology 77 802–813. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2656.2008.01390.x ELITH , J. and L EATHWICK , J. R. (2009). Species distribution models: ecological explanation and prediction across space and time. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 40 677–697. GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY (2018). Blue Economy Factsheet. Accessed: 2025-09-18. NOAA F ISHERIES (2024a). 2017–2024 North Atlantic Right Whale Unusual Mortality Event. NOAA. NOAA F ISHERIES (2024b). Reducing Vessel Strikes to North Atlantic Right Whales. NOAA. NOAA F ISHERIES (2025a). Reducing Vessel Strikes to North Atlantic Right Whales. https://www.fisheries.noaa. gov/national/endangered-species-conservation/reducing-vessel-strikes-north-atlantic-right-whales. NOAA FISHERIES (2025b). Atlantic Large Whale Take Reduction Plan. https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/ new-england-mid-atlantic/marine-mammal-protection/atlantic-large-whale-take-reduction-plan. FUCILE , P. D., S INGER , R. C., B AUMGARTNER , M. and B ALL , K. (2006). A self contained recorder for acoustic observations from AUV’s. In OCEANS 2006 1–4. IEEE. FULTON , K. A., L IU , D. and Z ENG , D. (2015). Mixed model and estimating equation approaches for zero inflation in clustered binary response data with application to a dating violence study. The Annals of Applied Statistics 9 275–299. https://doi.org/10.1214/14-AOAS791 GARRISON , C. A. K. L., B AUMSTARK , R., W ARD -G EIGER , L. I. and H INES , E. (2012). Application of a habitat model to define calving habitat of the North Atlantic right whale in the southeastern United States. 

Endangered Species Research 18 73–87. HALL , D. B. (2000). Zero-inflated Poisson and binomial regression with random effects: a case study. Biometrics 

56 1030–1039. HALPIN , P. N., R EAD , A. J., F UJIOKA , E., B EST , B. D., D ONNELLY , B., H AZEN , L. J., K OT , C., U RIAN , K., LABRECQUE , E., D IMATTEO , A. et al. (2009). OBIS-SEAMAP: The world data center for marine mammal, sea bird, and sea turtle distributions. Oceanography 22 104–115. HEDLEY , S. L. and B UCKLAND , S. T. (2004). Spatial models for line transect sampling. Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and Environmental Statistics 9 181–199. HOLSCLAW , T., S ANSÓ , B., D EEGAN , K. and F OREST , C. E. (2017). Bayesian Nonhomogeneous Markov Models via Pólya–Gamma Data Augmentation with Applications to Rainfall Modeling. The Annals of Applied Statistics 11 393–426. https://doi.org/10.1214/16-AOAS1009 JI, J., R AMASAMY , J., N AZZARO , L., K OHUT , J. and E ZZAT , A. A. (2024). Machine learning for modeling North Atlantic right whale presence to support offshore wind energy development in the US Mid-Atlantic. 

Scientific Reports 14 29147. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80084-z JOHNSON , D. S., L AAKE , J. L. and V ER HOEF , J. M. (2010). A Model-based Approach for Making Ecological Inference from Distance Sampling Data. Biometrics 66 310–318. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-0420.2009. 01265.x JOHNSON , H. D., T AGGART , C. T., N EWHALL , A. E., L IN , Y.-T. and B AUMGARTNER , M. F. (2022). Acoustic detection range of right whale upcalls identified in near-real time from a moored buoy and a Slocum glider. 

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 151 2558–2575. KNOWLTON , A. R., H AMILTON , P. K., M ARX , M. K., P ETTIS , H. M. and K RAUS , S. D. (2012). Monitoring North Atlantic right whale Eubalaena glacialis entanglement rates: a 30 yr retrospective. Marine Ecology Progress Series 466 293–302. KRISHNAN , R. G., S HALIT , U. and S ONTAG , D. (2015). Deep Kalman Filters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05121 .LAIST , D. W., K NOWLTON , A. R. and P ENDLETON , D. (2014). Effectiveness of mandatory vessel speed limits for protecting North Atlantic right whales. Endangered Species Research 23 133–147. 23 

LAMBERT , D. (1992). Zero-inflated Poisson regression, with an application to defects in manufacturing. Techno-metrics 34 1–14. LEE , S.-M., P HO , K.-H. and L I, C.-S. (2021). Validation likelihood estimation method for a zero-inflated Bernoulli regression model with missing covariates. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference 214 105– 127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jspi.2021.01.005 LI, C.-S. and L U, M. (2022). Semiparametric zero-inflated Bernoulli regression with applications. Journal of Applied Statistics 49 2845–2869. https://doi.org/10.1080/02664763.2021.1925228 MAC KENZIE , D. I., N ICHOLS , J. D., L ACHMAN , G. B., D ROEGE , S., R OYLE , J. A. and L ANGTIMM , C. A. (2002). Estimating site occupancy rates when detection probabilities are less than one. Ecology 83 2248–2255. MAC KENZIE , D. I., N ICHOLS , J. D., H INES , J. E., K NUTSON , M. G. and F RANKLIN , A. B. (2003). Estimating site occupancy, colonization, and local extinction when a species is detected imperfectly. Ecology 84 2200– 2207. https://doi.org/10.1890/02-3090 MAC KENZIE , D. I., N ICHOLS , J. D., R OYLE , J. A., P OLLOCK , K. H., B AILEY , L. L. and H INES , J. E. (2017). 

Occupancy estimation and modeling: inferring patterns and dynamics of species occurrence , 2 ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam. MARESCOT , L., L YET , A., S INGH , R. et al. (2020). Inferring wildlife poaching in southeast Asia with multi-species dynamic occupancy models. Ecography 43 239–250. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.04536 MARINE GEOSPATIAL ECOLOGY LAB , D UKE UNIVERSITY (2022). Mapping Tool for Marine Mammal Density for the U.S. Atlantic. OBIS-SEAMAP. Accessed: March, 2026. MAXWELL , S. M., HAZEN , E. L., LEWISON , R. L., DUNN , D. C., BAILEY , H., BOGRAD , S. J., BRISCOE , D. K., F OSSETTE , S., H OBDAY , A. J., B ENNETT , M., B ENSON , S. R., C ALDWELL , M. R., COSTA , D. P., D EWAR , H., E GUCHI , T., H AZEN , L. H., K OHIN , S., S IPPEL , T. and C ROWDER , L. B. (2015). Dynamic ocean management: Defining and conceptualizing real-time management of the ocean. Ma-rine Policy 58 42–50. MCWILLIAMS , J. C. (2016). Submesoscale currents in the ocean. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathe-matical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 472 20160117. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2016.0117 MILLER , J. (2010). Species distribution modeling. Geography Compass 4 490–509. MILLER , D. L., B URT , M. L., R EXSTAD , E. and T HOMAS , L. (2013). Spatial models for distance sampling data: recent developments and future directions. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 4 1001–1010. https://doi. org/10.1111/2041-210X.12105 MONSARRAT , S., P ENNINO , M. G., S MITH , T. D., R EEVES , R. R., M EYNARD , C. N., K APLAN , D. M. and RODRIGUES , A. S. (2016). A spatially explicit estimate of the prewhaling abundance of the endangered North Atlantic right whale. Conservation Biology 30 783–791. DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY (2023). Marine Species Monitoring for the U.S. Navy’s Atlantic Fleet Training and Testing (AFTT) – 2022 Annual Report Annual Report, U.S. Fleet Forces Command, Norfolk, Virginia. OLIVER , M. J. and I RWIN , A. J. (2008). Objective global ocean biogeographic provinces. Geophysical Research Letters 35 . https://doi.org/10.1029/2008gl034238 PAPADOPOULOS , P., C OIT , D. W. and E ZZAT , A. A. (2021). Seizing opportunity: Maintenance optimization in offshore wind farms considering accessibility, production, and crew dispatch. IEEE Transactions on Sustain-able Energy 13 111–121. PARDO , M. A., G ERRODETTE , T., B EIER , E., G ENDRON , D., F ORNEY , K. A., C HIVERS , S. J., B ARLOW , J. and P ALACIOS , D. M. (2015). Inferring cetacean population densities from the absolute dynamic topography of the ocean in a hierarchical Bayesian framework. PLoS ONE 10 e0120727. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0120727 PENDLETON , D. E., S ULLIVAN , P. J., B ROWN , M. W., C OLE , T. V., G OOD , C. P., M AYO , C. A., M ON -

> GER

, B. C., P HILLIPS , S., R ECORD , N. R. and P ERSHING , A. J. (2012). Weekly predictions of North At-lantic right whale Eubalaena glacialis habitat reveal influence of prey abundance and seasonality of habitat preferences. Endangered Species Research 18 147–161. PETERSEN , C., J I, J., Y E, F., E ZZAT , A. A., K OHUT , J., S AGINAW , D., M ONTANTI , A. and C AMMAROTA , J. (2026). Data-Driven probabilistic simulation of vessel operations to support the blue economy. Ocean Engi-neering 354 124818. PETTIS , H. M. and H AMILTON , P. K. (2026). North Atlantic Right Whale Consortium 2025 Annual Report Card Technical Report, North Atlantic Right Whale Consortium. https://doi.org/10.1575/1912/72893 RANGAPURAM , S. S., S EEGER , M. W., G ASTHAUS , J., S TELLA , L., W ANG , Y. and J ANUSCHOWSKI , T. (2018). Deep State Space Models for Time Series Forecasting. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31 .ROBERTS , J. J., B EST , B. D., M ANNOCCI , L., F UJIOKA , E., H ALPIN , P. N., P ALKA , D. L., G ARRISON , L. P., MULLIN , K. D., C OLE , T. V. N., K HAN , C. B., M CLELLAN , W. A., P ABST , D. A. and L OCKHART , G. G. (2016). Habitat-based cetacean density models for the US Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. Scientific Reports 6

22615. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep22615 24 

ROBERTS , J. J., Y ACK , T. M., F UJIOKA , E., H ALPIN , P. N., B AUMGARTNER , M. F., B OISSEAU , O., C HAVEZ -ROSALES , S., C OLE , T. V., C OTTER , M. P., D AVIS , G. E. et al. (2024). North Atlantic right whale density surface model for the US Atlantic evaluated with passive acoustic monitoring. Marine Ecology Progress Series 

732 167–192. ROYLE , J. A., D AWSON , D. K. and B ATES , S. (2004). Modeling abundance effects in distance sampling. Ecology 

85 1591–1597. https://doi.org/10.1890/03-3127 ROYLE , J. A. and D ORAZIO , R. M. (2008). Hierarchical Modeling and Inference in Ecology: The Analysis of Data from Populations, Metapopulations and Communities . Academic Press, London. SCOTT , S. L. (2002). Bayesian Methods for Hidden Markov Models: Recursive Computing in the 21st Century. 

Journal of the American Statistical Association 97 337–351. https://doi.org/10.1198/016214502753479464 SILBER , G., D ANGERFIELD , A., S MITH , J., R EEB , D. and L EVENSON , J. (2023). Offshore wind energy de-velopment and North Atlantic right whales. Sterling (VA): US Department of the Interior, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management .SOROCHAN , K. A., P LOURDE , S., B AUMGARTNER , M. F. and J OHNSON , C. L. (2021). Availability, supply, and aggregation of prey (Calanus spp.) in foraging areas of the North Atlantic right whale (Eubalaena glacialis). 

ICES Journal of Marine Science 78 3498-3520. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsab200 WHITT , A. D., D UDZINSKI , K. and L ALIBERTÉ , J. R. (2013). North Atlantic right whale distribution and seasonal occurrence in nearshore waters off New Jersey, USA, and implications for management. Endangered Species Research 20 59–69. YAU , C., P APASPILIOPOULOS , O., R OBERTS , G. O. and H OLMES , C. (2011). Bayesian Non-Parametric Hidden Markov Models with Applications in Genomics. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 73 37–57. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2010.00756.x YE, F., Z HANG , X., S TEIN , M. L. and A ZIZ EZZAT , A. (2025). DeepMIDE: A Multi-Output Spatio-Temporal Method for Ultra-Scale Offshore Wind Energy Forecasting. Technometrics 1–25. YOUDEN , W. J. (1950). Index for rating diagnostic tests. Cancer 3 32–35. YUAN , Y., B ACHL , F. E., L INDGREN , F., B ORCHERS , D. L., I LLIAN , J. B., B UCKLAND , S. T., R UE , H. and GERRODETTE , T. (2017). Point process models for spatio-temporal distance sampling data from a large-scale survey of blue whales. Annals of Applied Statistics 11 2270–2297. https://doi.org/10.1214/17-AOAS1078